A WARHAMMER 40,000 OMNIBUS
EISENHORN
Dan Abnett
IT IS THE 41st millennium. For more than a hundred centuries the Emperor
has sat immobile on the Golden Throne of Earth. He is the master of
mankind by the will of the gods, and master of a million worlds by the
might of his inexhaustible armies. He is a rotting carcass writhing invisibly
with power from the Dark Age of Technology. He is the Carrion Lord of the
Imperium for whom a thousand souls are sacrificed every day, so that he
may never truly die.
YET EVEN IN his deathless state, the Emperor continues his eternal vigilance.
Mighty battlefleets cross the daemon-infested miasma of the warp, the only
route between distant stars, their way lit by the Astronomican, the psychic
manifestation of the Emperors will. Vast armies give battle in his name on
uncounted worlds. Greatest amongst His soldiers are the Adeptus Astartes,
the Space Marines, bio-engineered super-warriors. Their comrades in arms
are legion: the Imperial Guard and countless planetary defence forces, the
ever-vigilant Inquisition and the tech-priests of the Adeptus Mechanicus to
name only a few. But for all their multitudes, they are barely enough to hold
off the ever-present threat from aliens, heretics, mutants – and worse.
TO BE A man in such times is to be one amongst untold billions. It is to live
in the cruellest and most bloody regime imaginable. These are the tales of
those times. Forget the power of technology and science, for so much has
been forgotten, never to be re-learned. Forget the promise of progress and
understanding, for in the grim dark future there is only war. There is no
peace amongst the stars, only an eternity of carnage and slaughter, and the
laughter of thirsting gods.
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
XENOS
MISSING IN ACTION
MALLEUS
BACKCLOTH FOR A CROWN ADDITIONAL
HERETICUS
INTRODUCTION
ONCE, WHEN ASKED where he got his ideas, David Mamet replied, ‘I think
of them’. In a similar vein, when asked where she got her energy from, my
daughter Lily answered, ‘Woolworths.’ Ba-dum tish!
Rather less quick-witted than either of them, I regularly struggle when I
get asked about ideas and their origins, and usually come up with some old
cobblers about ‘sometimes, if I’m on a train, things just occur to me...’ or
‘you never know when an idea’s going to hit you...’
Because you don’t. Owning, as I do, a mind as reliable and watertight as
the average game of Ker-Plunk!, I have learned to become something of a
note-taker. I jot stuff down, anything, everything, as it occurs to me – yes,
on trains, or planes, or sofas, or seesaws, or the queue at Tesco – so I don’t
lose it. I use notebooks, old envelopes, Post-its, the backs of shopping lists,
the foreheads of passing children, whatever’s to hand. Then, when I actually
need an idea, professionally speaking, I rifle through this scrap-head
resource and eventually come up with something that makes me go ‘Oh,
yeah, that’d work.’ Except, of course, for the occasions when I find
something that makes me go, ‘What is that? A “B”? What’s that word? Did
I write this?’
So I’m delighted to be able to say that in the case of Eisenhorn (which is
the umbrella title we’ve given to the cycle of novels and linked short stories
collected in this spiffy volume), I know exactly where the idea came from.
Not me, that’s where.
There is a rather gorgeous painting that many of you, I’m sure, will be
familiar with. It’s called Inquisitor Tannenberg, it’s by John Blanche, and it
has been reproduced in various places, including the Inquis Exterminatus.
Know the one? Guy with a scalp full of cables, a black fur coat, a double-
headed eagle familiar on his shoulder, a gold-chased bolt pistol in his hand?
Yes, it is good, isn’t it?
I’d been working for the Black Library for a few years, producing a
variety of things, most notably the Gaunt’s Ghosts novels. So the grim
nightmare of the far future, where there is only war and the galaxy’s alight
and everyone’s got a headache, was pretty much my thing. The editors kept
me fed with all the latest fluff and hot new supplements, just to keep me in
the loop. And one day, they sent me this pile of photocopies: sketches,
paste-ups, notes. There was going to be, they told me, a new game called
Inquisitor, and they were so jazzed by the concepts and ideas coming out of
the game’s development, they decided to send me all the stuff, hush-hush,
in the hope that it might inspire me, Gaunt-wise.
As soon as I opened the package and started leafing through, I could see
what they meant. This was a rich seam indeed, full of wonderful baroque
material. Among the pages, along with a number of other very fine pictures,
was a copy of John Blanche’s painting. And that was it. I picked up the
phone, called Black Library and said, ‘Can I please write about this?’ Even
though, truth be told, at that stage I didn’t know exactly what ‘this’ was.
They said yes (I think they sensed the enthusiasm in my voice). The idea
was that if I could write the novel quickly enough, it could come out AT
THE SAME TIME as the game launch, and everyone would look big and
clever, like it had been planned that way all along.
I visited the Studio, and got great help and advice from the game
developers, particularly Gav Thorpe. Then I got to work.
I think what inspired me about John’s painting was the aristocratic
clothing: the rich black velvet of the sleeves, the engraved gold of the
elegant weapon. This wasn’t about the battlefield, the front-line of mud and
gas and behemoth engines. This was a glimpse behind the lines at the
internal complexity of the Imperium. It offered a chance to explore what
might be called the ‘domestic’ side of the Warhammer 40,000 universe: the
daily, non-military, life – at work, at worship, at rest, at court, at slum-level.
A chance to visit worlds that were not levelled by war, and see how the
billions of Imperial citizens lived.
And also to find out what evils stalked them, even in the shadows of their
own hive cities.
The novel turned into a trilogy that charts the career of a man. Other
stories, two of which are collected here, lace into that trilogy and, for those
who are interested, the exploits of several of these characters continue in the
Ravenor novels that are my current concern.
John Blanche’s images have always had such a profound influence on the
growth of the Warhammer 40,000 universe’s unique flavour, I’m proud to
acknowledge that painting as the inspirational source of Eisenhorn.
Everywhere you look, his spiky, gothic, ornate visions inform the game, and
I’d like to think you can find a hint of them permeating this collection. So,
individual dedications notwithstanding, this collected volume is respectfully
dedicated to Mr. John Blanche.
Of course, if I ever work out whose idea it was to write these stories in
the first person, I’ll be round their house with a baseball bat. The plot
problems that caused...
Oh, hang on. That was me.
Dan Abnett
Maidstone, 9th August, 2004
XENOS
BY ORDER OF HIS MOST HOLY MAJESTY
THE GOD-EMPEROR OF TERRA
SEQUESTERED INQUISITORIAL DOSSIERS
AUTHORISED PERSONS ONLY
CASE FILE ii2:67B:AA6:Xad
Please enter your authority code > ********
Validating...
Thank you, Inquisitor. You may proceed.
VERBAL TRANSCRIPT OF PICT-RECORDED DOCUMENT
LOCATION: MAGINOR
DATE: 239.M41
RECOVERED FROM SERVITOR RECORDING MODULE
TRANSCRIBED BY SAVANT ELEDIX, ORDO HERETICUS
INQUISITORIAL DATA-LIBRARY FACULTY,
FIBOS SECUNDUS, 240.M41
[Pict-record white noise segues to] Darkness. Sounds of distant human
pain. A flash of light [poss. las-fire?]. Sounds of running.
Pict-source moves, tracking, vibrating. Some stone walls, in close focus.
Another flash, brighter, closer. Squeal of pain [source unknown]. An
extremely bright flash [loss of picture].
[Image indistinct for 2 minutes 38 seconds; some background noise.]
A man [subject (i)] in long robes, calls out as he strides past close to the
pict-source [speech unrecoverable]. Surroundings, dark stone [poss. tunnel?
tomb?]. (i)’s identity unknown [partial face view only]. Pict-source moves
in close behind (i), observing as (i) draws a force hammer from a thigh loop
under his robe. Close up on (i)’s hands as he grips haft. Inquisitorial signet
ring in plain view, (i) turns [face obscured by shadow], (i) speaks.
VOICE (i): Move in! Move in, in the name of all that’s holy! Come on
and [words obliterated by sound-flash] bastard monster to death!
Further flashes of light, now clearly close las-impacts. Pict-source filters
fail to block glare [white out].
[Image white out for 0 minutes 14 seconds; resolution slowly returning.]
Passing in through the high stone entrance of some considerable chamber.
Grey stone, rough hewn. Pict-source pans. Bodies in doorway, and also
slumped down interior steps. Massive injuries, mangled. Stones wet with
blood.
VOICE OFF [(i)?]: Where are you? Where are you? Show yourself!
Pict-source moves in. Two human shapes move past it to left, blurred
[image-stall reveals one [subject (ii)] to be male, approx 40 years, heavy-
set, wearing Imperial Guard-issue body plate [no insignia or idents],
significant facial scarring [old], wielding belt-fed heavy stubber; other
[subject (iii)] is female, approx 25 years, svelte, skin dyed blue, tattoos and
body-glove armour of a Morituri Death Cultist initiate, wielding force blade
[approx 45cm length].
Blurred shapes (ii) and (iii) move beyond pict-source. Pict-source pans
round, establishing sidelong view of (ii) and (iii) engaged in rapid hand-to-
hand warfare with adversaries on lower steps. Adversaries are
heterogeneous mix: six humans with surgical/bionic implants, two mutants,
three offensive servitors [see attached file record for stall-frame details], (ii)
fires heavy stubber [sound track distorts].
Two human adversaries pulped [backwash smoke haze renders image
partially indistinct], (iii) severs head of mutant, vaults backwards
[transcriptional assumption – pict-source too slow to follow] and impales
human adversary. Pict-source moves down [image jerky].
VOICE OFF: Maneesha! To the left! To the l—
Pict-source makes partial capture as (iii) is hit repeatedly by energy fire,
(iii) convulses, explodes. Pict-source hit by blood mist [image fogs]. [Image
wiped clear.] (ii) is yelling, moving ahead out of view, firing heavy stubber.
Sudden crossfire laser effect [las-flare blinds pict-source optics].
[Various noise sources, indistinct voices, some screaming.]
[Image returns.] (i) is just ahead of pict-source, charging into wide, flat
chamber lit by green chemical lamps [face illuminated by light for 0.3
seconds]. Subject (i) positively identified as Inquisitor Hetris Lugenbrau.
LUGENBRAU: Quixos! Quixos! I put it all to the sword and the
cleansing flame! Now you, monster! Now you, bastard!
VOICE [unidentified]: I am here, Lugenbrau. Kharnagar awaits.
Lugenbrau (i) moves off-image. Pict-source pans. Image jerky. Body
parts scattered on chamber floor [composite identifies subject (ii) as one of
nine corpses]. Major detonation(s) nearby. Image shakes, pict-source falls
sidelong.
[Image blank for 1 minute 7 seconds. Significant background noise.]
[Image returns.] Lugenbrau partly visible off frame left, engaged in
combat. Afterglow-residue of force hammer blows remain burned on image
for several seconds [image indistinct].
Pict-source turns to focus on Lugenbrau. Lugenbrau engaged in hand-to-
hand combat with unknown foe. Movements too fast for pict-source to
capture.
Blur. Human figures [identity unknown, poss. adversary troops] move in
from right frame. Heads of human figures explode. Figures topple.
[White out. Pict-source blanked. Duration unknown.]
[Image returns, imperfect] Jerky shots of ground and wall. Refocus
blurring. Pict-source reacquires Lugenbrau and adversary in combat [smoke
fumes haze view]. Combat as before too rapid for pict-source to capture.
Extensive background noise. Glowing line [believed to be blade weapon]
impales Lugenbrau. Image shakes [some picture loss]. Lugenbrau
immolates [image burns out].
[Pause/pict-blank of unknown duration.]
[Image returns.] Close up of face looking into pict-source. Identity
unknown [subject (iv)]. (iv) is handsome, sculptural, smiling, eyes blank.
VOICE (iv): Hello, little thing. I am Cherubael.
Light flash.
Scream [believed to originate from pict-source].
[Image out. Recording ends.]
ONE
A cold coming.
Death in the dormant vaults.
Some puritanical reflections.
HUNTING THE RECIDIVIST Murdin Eyclone, I came to Hubris in the
Dormant of 240.M41, as the Imperial sidereal calendar has it.
Dormant lasted eleven months of Hubris’s twenty-nine month lunar year,
and the only signs of life were the custodians with their lighted poles and
heat-gowns, patrolling the precincts of the hibernation tombs.
Within those sulking basalt and ceramite vaults, the grandees of Hubris
slept, dreaming in crypts of aching ice, awaiting Thaw, the middle season
between Dormant and Vital.
Even the air was frigid. Frost encrusted the tombs, and a thick cake of ice
covered the featureless land. Above, star patterns twinkled in the curious,
permanent night. One of them was Hubris’s sun, so far away now. Come
Thaw, Hubris would spin into the warm embrace of its star again.
Then it would become a blazing globe. Now it was just a fuzz of light.
As my gun-cutter set down on the landing cross at Tomb Point, I had
pulled on an internally heated bodyskin and swathes of sturdy, insulated
foul weather gear, but still the perilous cold cut through me now. My eyes
watered, and the tears froze on my lashes and cheeks. I remembered the
details of the cultural brief my savant had prepared, and quickly lowered
my frost visor, trembling as warm air began to circulate under the plastic
mask.
Custodians, alerted to my arrival by astropathic hails, stood waiting for
me at the base of the landing cross. Their lighted poles dipped in obeisance
in the frozen night and the air steamed with the heat that bled from their
cloaks. I nodded to them, showing their leader my badge of office. An ice-
car awaited; a rust-coloured arrowhead twenty metres long, mounted on ski-
blade runners and spiked tracks.
It carried me away from the landing cross and I left the winking signal
lights and the serrated dagger-shape of my gun-cutter behind in the
perpetual winter night.
The spiked tracks kicked up blizzards of rime behind us. Ahead, despite
the lamps, the landscape was black and impenetrable. I rode with Lores
Vibben and three custodians in a cabin lit only by the amber glow of the
craft’s control panel. Heating vents recessed in the leather seats breathed
out warm, stale air.
A custodian handed back a data-slate to Vibben. She looked at it
cursorily and passed it on to me. I realised my frost visor was still down. I
raised it and began to search my pockets for my eye glasses.
With a smile, Vibben produced them from within her own swaddled,
insulated garb. I nodded thanks, put them on my nose and began to read.
I was just calling up the last plates of text when the ice-car halted.
‘Processional Two-Twelve,’ announced one of the custodians.
We dismounted, sliding our visors down into place.
Jewels of frost-flakes fluttered in the blackness about us, sparkling as
they crossed through the ice-car’s lamp beams. I’ve heard of bitter cold.
Emperor grace me I never feel it again. Biting, crippling, actually bitter to
taste on the tongue. Every joint in my frame protested and creaked.
My hands and my mind were numb.
That was not good.
Processional Two-Twelve was a hibernation tomb at the west end of the
great Imperial Avenue. It housed twelve thousand, one hundred and forty-
two members of the Hubris ruling elite.
We approached the great monument, crunching up the black, frost-coated
steps.
I halted. ‘Where are the tomb’s custodians?’
‘Making their rounds,’ I was told.
I glanced at Vibben and shook my head. She slid her hand into her fur-
edged robes.
‘Knowing we approach?’ I urged, addressing the custodian again.
‘Knowing we expect to meet them?’
‘I will check,’ said the custodian, the one who had circulated the slate.
He pushed on up the steps, the phosphor light on his pole bobbing.
The other two seemed ill at ease.
I beckoned to Vibben, so she would follow me up after the leader.
We found him on a lower terrace, gazing at the strewn bodies of four
custodians, their light poles fizzling out around them.
‘H-how?’ he stammered.
‘Stay back,’ Vibben told him and drew her weapon. Its tiny amber Armed
rune glowed in the darkness.
I took out my blade, igniting it. It hummed.
The south entry of the tombs was open. Shafts of golden light shone out.
All my fears were rapidly being confirmed.
We entered, Vibben sweeping the place from side to side with her
handgun. The hall was narrow and high, lit by chemical glow-globes.
Intruding frost was beginning to mark the polished basalt walls.
A few metres inside, another custodian lay dead in a stiffening mirror of
blood. We stepped over him. To each side, hallways opened up, admitting
us to the hibernation stacks. In every direction, rows and rows of ice-berths
ranged down the smoothed basalt chambers.
It was like walking into the Imperium’s grandest morgue.
Vibben swept soundlessly to the right and I went left.
I admit I was excited by now, eager to close and conclude a business that
had lasted six years. Eyclone had evaded me for six whole years! I studied
his methods every day and dreamed of him every night.
Now I could smell him.
I raised my visor.
Water was pattering from the roof. Thaw water. It was growing warmer
in here. In their ice-berths, some of the dim figures were stirring.
Too early! Far too early!
Eyclone’s first man came at me from the west as I crossed a trunk-
junction corridor. I spun, the power sword in my hand, and cut through his
neck before his ice-axe could land.
The second came from the south, the third from the east. And then more.
More.
A blur.
As I fought, I heard furious shooting from the vaults away to my right.
Vibben was in trouble.
I could hear her over the vox-link in our hoods: ‘Eisenhorn! Eisenhorn!’
I wheeled and cut. My opponents were all dressed in heat-gowns, and
carried ice-tools that made proficient weapons. Their eyes were dark and
unforthcoming. Though they were fast, there was something in them that
suggested they were doing this mindlessly, by order.
The power sword, an antique and graceful weapon, blessed by the
Provost of Inx himself, spun in my hand. With five abrupt moves I made
corpses out of them and left their blood vapour drifting in the air.
‘Eisenhorn!’
I turned and ran. I splashed heavily down a corridor sluiced with melt
water. More shots from ahead. A sucking cry.
I found Vibben face down across a freezer tube, frozen blood gluing her
to the sub-zero plastic. Eight of Eyclone’s servants lay sprawled around her.
Her weapon lay just out of reach of her clawing hand, the spent cell ejected
from the grip.
I am forty-two standard years old, in my prime by Imperial standards,
young by those of the Inquisition. All my life, I have had a reputation for
being cold, unfeeling. Some have called me heartless, ruthless, even cruel.
I am not. I am not beyond emotional response or compassion. But I
possess – and my masters count this as perhaps my paramount virtue – a
singular force of will. Throughout my career it has served me well to draw
on this facility and steel myself, unflinching, at all that this wretched galaxy
can throw at me. To feel pain or fear or grief is to allow myself a luxury I
cannot afford.
Lores Vibben had served with me for five and a half years. In that period
she had saved my life twice. She saw herself as my aide and my bodyguard,
yet in truth she was more a companion and a fellow warrior. When I
recruited her from the clan-slums of Tornish, it was for her combat skills
and brutal vigour. But I came to value her just as much for her sharp mind,
soft wit and clear head.
I stared down at her body for a moment. I believe I may have uttered her
name.
I EXTINGUISHED MY power sword and, sliding it into its scabbard, moved
back into the shadows on the far side of the hibernation gallery. I could hear
nothing except the increasingly persistent thaw-drip. Freeing my sidearm
from its leather rig under my left armpit, I checked its load and opened a
vox link. Eyclone was undoubtedly monitoring all traffic in and out of
Processional Two-Twelve, so I used Glossia, an informal verbal cipher
known only to myself and my immediate colleagues. Most inquisitors
develop their own private languages for confidential communication, some
more sophisticated than others. Glossia, the basics of which I had designed
ten years before, was reasonably complex and had evolved, organically,
with use.
‘Thorn wishes aegis, rapturous beasts below.’
‘Aegis, arising, the colours of space,’ Betancore responded immediately
and correctly.
‘Rose thorn, abundant, by flame light crescent.’
A pause. ‘By flame light crescent? Confirm.’
‘Confirm.’
‘Razor delphus pathway! Pattern ivory!’
‘Pattern denied. Pattern crucible.’
‘Aegis, arising.’
The link broke. He was on his way. He had taken the news of Vibben’s
death as hard as I expected. I trusted that would not affect his performance.
Midas Betancore was a hot-blooded, impetuous man, which was partly why
I liked him. And used him.
I moved out of the shadows again, my sidearm raised. A Scipio-pattern
naval pistol, finished in dull chrome with inlaid ivory grips, it felt
reassuringly heavy in my gloved hand. Ten rounds, every one a fat, blunt
man-stopper, were spring-loaded into the slide inside the grip. I had four
more armed slides just like it in my hip pocket.
I forget where I acquired the Scipio. It had been mine for a few years.
One night, three years before, Vibben had prised off the ceramite grip plates
with their touch-worn, machined-stamped engravings of the Imperial
Aquila and the Navy motto, and replaced them with ivory grips she had
etched herself. A common practise on Tornish, she informed me, handing
the weapon back the next day. The new grips were like crude scrimshaw,
showing on each side a poorly executed human skull through which a
thorny rose entwined, emerging through an eye socket, shedding cartoon
droplets of blood. She’d inlaid carmine gems into the droplets to emphasise
their nature. Below the skull, my name was scratched in a clumsy scroll.
I had laughed. There had been times when I’d almost been too
embarrassed to draw the gang-marked weapon in a fight.
Now, now she was dead, I realise what an honour had been paid to me
through that devoted work.
I made a promise to myself: I would kill Eyclone with this gun.
AS A DEVOTED member of his high majesty the God-Emperor’s
Inquisition, I find my philosophy bends towards that of the Amalathians. To
the outside galaxy, members of our orders appear much alike: an inquisitor
is an inquisitor, a being of fear and persecution. It surprises many that
internally, we are riven with clashing ideologies.
I know it surprised Vibben. I spent one long afternoon trying to explain
the differences. I failed.
To express it in simple terms, some inquisitors are puritans and some are
radicals. Puritans believe in and enforce the traditional station of the
Inquisition, working to purge our galactic community of any criminal or
malevolent element: the triumvirate of evil – alien, mutant and daemon.
Anything that clashes with the pure rule of mankind, the preachings of the
Ministorium and the letter of Imperial Law is subject to a puritan
inquisitor’s attention. Hard-line, traditional, merciless... that is the puritan
way.
Radicals believe that any methods are allowable if they accomplish the
Inquisitorial task. Some, as I understand it, actually embrace and use
forbidden resources, such as the Warp itself, as weapons against the
enemies of mankind.
I have heard the arguments often enough. They appal me. Radical belief
is heretical.
I am a puritan by calling and an Amalathian by choice. The ferociously
strict ways of the monodominant philosophy oft-times entices me, but there
is precious little subtlety in their ways and thus it is not for me.
Amalathians take our name from the conclave at Mount Amalath. Our
endeavour is to maintain the status quo of the Imperium, and we work to
identify and destroy any persons or agencies that might destabilise the
power of the Imperium from without or within. We believe in strength
through unity. Change is the greatest enemy. We believe the God-Emperor
has a divine plan, and we work to sustain the Imperium in stability until that
plan is made known. We deplore factions and in-fighting... Indeed, it is
sometimes a painful irony that our beliefs mark us as a faction within the
political helix of the Inquisition.
We are the steadfast spine of the Imperium, its antibodies, fighting
disease, insanity, injury, invasion.
I can think of no better way to serve, no better way to be an inquisitor.
So you have me then, pictured. Gregor Eisenhorn, inquisitor, puritan,
Amalathian, forty-two years old standard, an inquisitor for the past eighteen
years. I am tall and broad at the shoulders, strong, resolute. I have already
told you of my force of will, and you will have noted my prowess with a
blade.
What else is there? Am I clean-shaven? Yes! My eyes are dark, my hair
darker and thick. These things matter little.
Come and let me show you how I killed Eyclone.
TWO
The dead awake.
Betancore’s temper.
Elucidations by Aemos.
I CLUNG TO the shadows, moving through the great tomb as silently as I
knew how. A terrible sound rolled through the thawing vaults of
Processional Two-Twelve. Fists and palms beating at coffin hoods. Wailing.
Gurgling.
The sleepers were waking, their frigid bodies, sore with hibernation
sickness, trapped in their caskets. No honour guard of trained cryogeneers
waited to unlock them, to sluice their organs with warming bio-fluids or
inject stimulants or massage paralysed extremities.
Thanks to Eyclone’s efforts, twelve thousand one hundred and forty-two
members of the planet’s ruling class were being roused early into the bitter
season of Dormant, and roused without the necessary medical supervision.
I had no doubt that they would all suffocate in minutes.
My mind scrolled back through the details my savant had prepared for
me. There was a central control room, where I could disengage the ice-berth
locks and at least free them all. But to what good? Without the resuscitation
teams, they would fail and perish.
And if I hunted out the control room, Eyclone would have time to escape.
In Glossia code, I communicated this quandary to Betancore, and told
him to alert the custodians. He informed me, after a pause, that crash-teams
and relief crews were on their way.
But why? The question was still there. Why was Eyclone doing this?
A massed killing was nothing unusual for a follower of Chaos. But there
had to be a point, above and beyond the deaths themselves.
I was pondering this as I crossed a hallway deep in the west wing of the
Processional. Frantic beating sounds came from the berths all around, and a
pungent mix of ice-water and bio-fluid spurted from the drain-taps and
cascaded over the floor.
A shot rang out. A las-shot. It missed me by less than a hand’s breadth
and exploded through the headboard of an ice berth behind me.
Immediately, the frantic hammering in that berth stopped, and the waters
running out of its ducts were stained pink.
I fired the Scipio down the vault, startled by the noise it made.
Two more las-shots flicked down at me.
Taking cover behind a stone bulkhead, I emptied a clip down the length
of the gallery, the spent shell cases smoking in the air as the pumping slide
ejected them. A hot vapour of cordite blew back at me.
I swung back into cover, exchanging clips.
A few more spits of laser drizzled past me, then a voice.
‘Eisenhorn? Gregor, is that you?’
Eyclone. I knew his thin voice at once. I didn’t answer.
‘You’re dead, you know, Gregor. Dead like they all are. Dead, dead,
dead. Step out and make it quick.’
He was good, I’ll give him that. My legs actually twitched, actually
started to walk me clear of cover into the open. Eyclone was infamous
across a dozen settled systems for his mind powers and mesmeric tone.
How else had he managed to get these dark-eyed fools to do his bidding?
But I have similar skills. And I have honed them well.
There is a time to use mind or voice tricks gently to draw out your target.
And there are times to use them like a stub-gun at point blank range.
It was time for the latter.
I pitched my voice, balanced my mind and yelled: ‘Show yourself first!’
Eyclone didn’t succumb. I didn’t expect him to. Like me, he had years of
resilience training. But his two gunmen were easy meat.
The first strode directly out into the middle of the gallery hallway,
dropping his lasgun with a clatter. The Scipio made a hole in the middle of
his forehead and blew his brains out behind him in a grotesque pink mist.
The other stumbled out on his heels, realised his mistake, and began firing.
One of his las-bolts scorched the sleeve of my jacket. I squeezed the
pistol’s trigger and the Scipio bucked and snarled in my tight grip.
The round penetrated his head under his nose, splintered on his upper
teeth and blew the sides of his skull out. He staggered and fell, dead fingers
firing his lasrifle again and again, blowing the fascias out of the hibernation
stalls around him. Putrid water, bio-fluid and plastic fragments poured out,
and some screams became louder.
I could hear footsteps above the screams. Eyclone was running.
I ran too, across the vaults, passing gallery after gallery.
The screaming, the pounding... God-Emperor help me I will never forget
that. Thousands of frantic souls waking up to face an agonising death.
Damn Eyclone. Damn him to hell and back.
Crossing the third gallery, I saw him, running parallel to me. He saw me
too. He wheeled, and fired.
I ducked back as the blasts of his laspistol shrieked past.
A glimpse was all I’d had: a short, wiry man, dressed in brown heat-
robes, his goatee neatly trimmed, his eyes twinkling with malice.
I fired back, but he was running again.
I ran on, glimpsed him down the next gallery and fired again.
At the next gallery, nothing. I waited, and pulled off my outer robe. It
was getting hot and damp in Processional Two-Twelve.
When another minute passed and there was still no sign, I began to edge
down the gallery towards his last position, gun raised. I’d got ten paces
when he swung out of hiding and blazed away at me.
I would have died right there, had not the joker-gods of fate and chance
played their hand.
At the moment Eyclone fired, several cryo-tubes finally gave way and
yowling, naked, blistered humans staggered out into the corridor, clawing
with ice-webbed hands, mewling, vomiting, blind and ice-burned.
Eyclone’s shots tore three of them apart and hideously wounded a fourth.
Had it not been for them, those las-shots would have finished me.
Footsteps, hurried. He was running again.
I pushed on down the gallery, stepping over the blasted ruins of the
sleepers who had inadvertently spared me. The wounded one, a middle-
aged female, compromised and naked as she lay in the melt-water, clutched
at my leg, begging for salvation. Eyclone’s gunfire had all but
disembowelled her.
I hesitated. A merciful headshot now would spare her everything. But I
could not. Once they were awake, the hierarchy of Hubris would not
understand a mercy killing. I would be trapped here for years, fighting my
case through every court in their legislature.
I shook off her desperate grip and moved on.
Do you think me weak, flawed? Do you hate me for setting my
inquisitorial role above the needs of one agonised being?
If you do, I commend you. I think of that woman still, and hate the fact I
left her to die slowly. But if you hate me, I know this about you... you are
no inquisitor. You don’t have the moral strength.
I could have finished her, and my soul might have been relieved. But that
would have been an end to my work. And I always think of me thousands...
millions perhaps... who would die worse deaths but for my actions.
Is that arrogance?
Perhaps... and perhaps arrogance is therefore a virtue of the Inquisition. I
would gladly ignore one life in agony if I could save a hundred, a thousand,
more...
Mankind must suffer so that mankind can survive. It’s that simple. Ask
Aemos. He knows.
Still, I dream of her and her bloody anguish. Pity me for that, at least.
I PRESSED ON through the tomb-vaults, and after another gallery or two,
progress became slow. Hundreds of sleepers had now freed themselves, the
hallways were jostling with their frantic, blind pain. I skirted those I could,
staying out of the way of grasping hands, stepping over some who lay
twitching and helpless on the floor. The collective sounds of their braying
and whimpering were almost intolerable. There was a hot, fetid stench of
decay and bio-waste. Several times I had to break free of hands that seized
me.
Grotesquely, the horror made it easier to track Eyclone. Every few paces,
another sleeper lay dead or dying, callously gunned down by murderers in
desperate flight.
I found a service door forced open at the end of the next file, and entered
a deep stairwell that wound up through the edifice. Chemical globes
suspended in wall brackets lit the way. From far above, I heard shots, and I
ascended, my pistol raised and braced, covering each turn of the staircase as
Vibben had taught me.
I came up to what a wall-plaque told me was level eight. I could hear
machine noise, industrial and heavy. Through another forced service door
lay the walkways to the next galleries and a side access hatch of brushed
grey adamite, which stencilled runes identified as the entrance to the main
cryogenic generators. Smoke coughed and noise rolled from the hatch.
The cryogenerator chamber was vast, its roof reaching up into the
pyramidal summit of Processional Two-Twelve. The rambling equipment it
contained was ancient and vast. The data-slate given to me in the ice-car
had said that the cryogenerators that ran the hibernation tombs of Hubris
had originally been constructed to equip the ark-fleet that carried the first
colonists to the world. They had been cut and salvaged from the giant arks
on arrival, and the stone tombs raised around them. A technomagos
brotherhood, descended from the ark-fleet engineers, had kept the
cryogenerators operating for thousands of years.
This cryogenerator was sixty metres tall and constructed from cast-iron
and copper painted in matt-red lead paint. As it rose, it sprouted branches in
the form of conduits and heat-exchangers that intertwined with the roof-
vents. The hot air of the room vibrated with the noise of its operation.
Smoke and steam wreathed the atmosphere and sweat broke out on my
brow and back the moment I stepped through the hatchway.
I looked around and quickly noted where several inspection hatches had
been levered away. The red paint was scored and scraped along each frame
where a crow-bar had been forced in, and hundreds of years of sacred
unguents and lexmechanical sigil-seals applied and tended by the
technomagi had been broken.
I peered in through the open covers and saw rows of copper-wound cells,
vibrating rack-frames wet with black lubricant, sooty ganglions of insulated
electrical routing and dripping, lagged iron pipes. Sprung-jawed clips with
biting metal teeth had been attached to some of the cells, and wiring from
these clips trailed back to a small and obviously new ceramite module box
taped inside the hatch frame. A digital runic display on the module flashed
amber.
This was where Eyclone’s men had artificially triggered the revival
process. That meant he had either turned and recruited local technomagi or
brought in experts from off-world. Either way, this signified considerable
resources.
I moved on, and clambered up a ladder frame onto a raised platform of
metal grille. There was something else here, a rectangular casket measuring
about a metre and a half along its longest edge. It rested on four claw-like
feet and had carrying handles built into its sides. The lid was open, and
dozens of cables and leads snaked out, linking it to the cryo-generator’s
electromechanical guts, exposed by another prised-off hatch.
I looked into the casket, but could make little sense of what I saw there:
circuit boards and complex mechanical elements linked by sheaves of cable.
And there was a space, a padded recess in the heart of the casket’s innards,
clearly waiting to receive something the size of a clenched fist. Loose cable
ends and plugs were taped in place, ready to be connected. But a key
component of this mysterious device was evidently missing.
My vox-link chimed in my ear. It was Betancore. I could barely hear him
over the noise of the cryogenerator as he made a quick report in Glossia.
‘Aegis, heavens uplift, thrice-sevenfold, a crown with stars. Infamous
angel without title, to Thorn by eight. Pattern?’
I considered. I was in no mood to take any more chances. ‘Thorn, pattern
hawk.’
‘Pattern hawk acknowledged,’ he said with relish.
I SAW MOVEMENT from the corner of my eye about a half-second after I
broke the link with Betancore: another of Eyclone’s black-eyed men,
running in through the main hatch with an old-model laspistol raised in his
hand.
His first shot, a twinkling ball of pink light, snapped the metal handrail of
the platform I stood on with an explosive ping. His second and third passed
over me as I dived down, and ricocheted off the cast-iron side of the
cryogenerator with scorching crackles.
I returned fire, prone, but the angle was bad. Two more las-shots came
my way, one cutting sideways into the edge of the platform deck and
cutting a gouge through the grille. The gunman was nearly at the foot of the
ladder-frame.
Now a second gunman entered the chamber, calling out after the first, a
powerful autorifle in his hands. He saw me, and began to raise the weapon,
but I had a cleaner angle on him, and dropped him quickly with two rounds
through the upper torso.
The other was almost below me now, and fired a shot that punched clean
through the grille just next to my right foot.
I didn’t hesitate. I went up and over the rail and directly down onto him.
We crashed onto the chamber floor, the powerful impact throwing the
Scipio out of my grasp despite my efforts to hold onto it. The man was
jabbering some insane nonsense into my face and had a good grip on the
front of my tunic. I had him by the throat and by the wrist of his gun-hand,
forcing the laspistol away. He fired it twice into the ceiling space above.
‘Enough!’ I commanded, modulating my tone to emphasise my will as I
drove it into his mind. ‘Drop it!’
He did, meekly, as if surprised. Psyker tricks of will often baffle those
who find themselves compelled by them. As he faltered, I threw a punch
that connected well and left him unconscious on the floor.
As I bent to recover the Scipio, Betancore voxed me again. ‘Aegis,
pattern hawk, infamous angel cast down.’
‘Thorn acknowledged. Resume pattern crucible.’
I pushed on after my quarry.
EYCLONE MADE IT into the upper vaults and out onto a landing platform
built into the sloping side of Processional Two-Twelve. The wind was
fierce. Eyclone had eight of his cult with him and they were expecting an
orbital pinnace that would carry them away to safety.
They had no way of knowing that, thanks to Betancore, their means of
escape was now burning in a deep impact gouge in the permafrost about
eight kilometres north.
What rose above the landing platform out of the blizzard night, its down
thrusters wailing, was my gun-cutter. Four hundred and fifty tonnes of
armoured alloy, eighty metres from barbed nose to raked stern, landing gear
still lowered like spider-legs, it rose on the blue-hot downwash of angled
jets. Banks of floodlights under its beak-nose cut on and bathed the deck
and the cultists in fierce white light.
Panicking, some of them fired up at it.
That was all the cue Betancore needed. His temper was hot, his mind
void of anything except the fact that Vibben was dead.
The gun-turrets in the ends of the stubby wings rotated and washed the
platform with withering heavy fire. Stone splintered. Bodies were reduced
to sprays of liquid.
Eyclone, more intelligent than his men, had sprinted off the platform to
the hatch as the gun-cutter rose into view.
And that’s where he ran into me.
He opened his mouth in shock and I pushed the muzzle of Vibben’s gun
into it. I’m sure he wanted to say something important. I didn’t care what it
was.
I punched the gun so hard into his mouth the trigger guard broke his
lower teeth. He tried to reach for something on his belt.
I fired.
Having emptied his brain-case and shattered it into the bargain, the round
still had so much force it crossed the deck and pinked off the armoured nose
of the hovering gun-cutter, just below the cockpit window.
‘Sorry,’ I said.
‘Don’t worry about it,’ Betancore crackled back over the vox-link.
‘MOST PERTURBATORY,’ said Aemos. It was his most frequent expression.
He was hunched over, peering down into the casket on the cryogenerator
chamber platform. Occasionally, he reached in to tinker with something, or
leaned down for a closer look. Gestures such as these made the heavy
augmetic eye glasses clamped to his hooked nose make a soft dialling click
as they auto-focused.
I stood at his shoulder, waiting, looking down at the back of his old, bald
head. The skin was liver-spotted and thin, and a narrow crescent of white
hair edged the back of his skull.
Uber Aemos was my savant, and my longest serving companion. He had
come into my service in the first month of my career in the Inquisition,
bequeathed to me by Inquisitor Hapshant, who was by then dying of
cerebral worms. Aemos was two hundred and seventy-eight standard years
old, and had provided his services as a savant to three inquisitors before me.
He was alive only thanks to significant bionic augmentation to his digestive
tract, liver, urinary system, hips and left leg.
In Hapshant’s service he had been injured by a stub-round. Tending him,
surgeons had found a chronically advanced and previously undiagnosed
cancer rampant in his abdomen. Had he not been shot, he would have died
within weeks. Thanks to the wound, the disease was found, excised and his
body repaired with plastic, ceramite and steel prosthetics.
Aemos referred to the whole ordeal as his ‘lucky suffering’ and still wore
the twisted plug of the stub round that had almost taken and certainly saved
his life on a chain around his stringy neck.
‘Aemos?’
He rose stiffly with a whine of bionics and turned to face me, shaking out
the floor length green folds of his embroidered robe. His augmetic eyewear
dominated his ancient face. He sometimes reminded me of a curious insect
with bulbous eyes and narrow, pinched mouth parts.
‘A codifier of unique design. A series processor, similar in layout to the
mind-impulse units used by the hallowed Adeptus Mechanicus to govern
the linkage between human brain and god-machine.’
‘You’ve seen such things?’ I asked, a little taken aback.
‘Once, in my travels. In passing. I do not pretend to have more than a
cursory knowledge. I am certain, however, that the Adeptus Mechanicus
would be interested in this device. It may be illicit technology or something
derived from apparatus stolen from them. Either way, they would impound
it.’
‘Either way, they’re not going to know about it. This is inquisitional
evidence.’
‘Quite so,’ he agreed.
There were distracting noises from below us. Tomb custodians and
technomagi from the cryogenerator brotherhood milled about in the
chamber, supervising the mammoth and, in my opinion, futile operation to
save the sleepers of Processional Two-Twelve. The whole tomb seethed
with activity, and the awful screams had not yet died down.
I saw how Aemos watched the work with keen interest, making notes to
himself on a data-slate strapped to his wrist. At the age of forty-two, he had
contracted a meme-virus that altered his brain function for ever, driving him
to collect information – any sort of information – whenever he got the
chance. He was pathologically compelled to acquire knowledge, a data-
addict. That made him an aggravating, easily sidetracked companion, and a
perfect savant, as four inquisitors had discovered.
‘Cold-bolted steel cylinders,’ he mused, looking up at the heat
exchangers. ‘Is that to provide stress-durability in temperature change, or
was it fabrication expedient? Also, what is the range of temperature change,
given—’
‘Aemos, please.’
‘Hmm?’ He looked back at me, remembering I was there.
‘The casket?’
‘Indeed. My apologies. A series processor... did I say that?’
‘Yes. Processing what? Data?’
‘I thought that at first, then I considered some mental or mental-
transference process. But I doubt either now I’ve studied it.’
I pointed down into the casket. ‘What’s missing?’
‘Oh, you noticed that too? This is most perturbatory. I’m still not certain,
of course, but it’s something angular, non-standard in shape and with its
own power source.’
‘You’re sure?’
‘There are no power inlets designed to couple to it, only power outlets.
And there’s something curious about the plugs. Non-standard mating. It’s
all non-standard.’
‘Xenos?’
‘No... human, just non-standard, custom made.’
‘Yeah, but what for?’ asked Betancore, climbing up the ladder frame to
join us. He looked sour, his unruly black curls framing a dark-skinned,
slender face that was usually alive with genial mischief.
‘I need to make further evaluations, Midas,’ said Aemos, hunching back
over the casket.
Betancore stared my way. He was as tall as me, but lighter in build. His
boots, breeches and tunic were made of soft black leather with red piping,
the old uniform of a Glavian pilot-hunter, and over that he wore, as always,
a short jacket of cerise silk with iridescent embroidery panels.
His hands were gloved in light blek-hide, and seemed to wait ominously
near the curved grips of the needle pistols holstered on his hips.
‘You took a long time getting here,’ I began.
‘They made me take the cutter back to the landing cross at Tomb Point.
Said they need the platform here for emergency flights. I had to walk back.
Then I saw to Lores.’
‘She died well, Betancore.’
‘Maybe. Is that possible?’ he added.
I made no reply. I knew how deep his foul moods could be. I knew he
had been in love with Lores Vibben, or at least had decided he was in love
with her. I knew things would get difficult with Betancore before they got
better.
‘Wheu eis this off-worlder? This Eisenhorn?’
The demanding voice rolled up from the chamber below us. I looked
down. A man had entered the cryogenerator chamber escorted by four
custodians in heat-gowns, carrying light-poles aloft. He was tall, with pallid
skin and greying hair, though his haughty bearing spoke of self-possession
and arrogance. He wore a decorative ceremonial heat-gown of bold yellow.
I didn’t know who he was, but he looked like trouble to me.
Aemos and Betancore were watching him too.
‘Any ideas as to who this is?’ I asked Aemos.
‘Well, you see, the yellow robes, like the light poles carried by the
custodians, symbolises the return of the sun and thus heat and light. It
denotes a high-ranking official of the Dormant Custodial Committee.’
‘I got that much myself,’ I muttered.
‘Oh, well his name is Nissemay Carpel, and he’s High Custodian, so you
should address him as such. He was born here, on Vital 235, fifty standard
years ago, the son of a—’
‘Enough! I knew we’d get there eventually.’
I walked to the rail and looked down. ‘I am Eisenhorn.’
He stared up at me, barely contained wrath bulging the veins in his neck.
‘Place him under arrest,’ he told his men.
THREE
Nissemay Carpel.
A light in endless darkness.
The Pontius.
I SHOT ONE meaningful glance at Betancore to stay his hand, then calmly
walked past him, slid down the ladder frame and approached Carpel. The
custodians closed in around me, but at a distance.
‘High custodian,’ I nodded.
He fixed me with a steady but wary gaze and licked spittle off his thin
lips. ‘You will be detained until—’
‘No,’ I replied. ‘I am an inquisitor of the God-Emperor of Mankind, Ordo
Xenos. I will co-operate in any investigation you bring to bear here, fully
and completely, but you will not and cannot detain me. Do you
understand?’
‘An... inquisitor?’
‘Do you understand?’ I repeated. I wasn’t using my will at all, not yet. I
would if I had to. But I trusted that he would have the sense to listen to me
first. He could make things awkward for me, but I could make things
intolerable for him.
He seemed to soften a little. As I had judged, part of his rage came from
shock at this incident, shock that so many planetary nobles in his care had
suffered. He was looking for somewhere to pin the blame. Now he had to
temper that with the idea that he was dealing with a member of the most
feared institution in the Imperium.
‘Thousands are dead,’ he began, a tremor in his voice. ‘This desecration..
. the high born of Hubris, violated by a... by a—’
‘A murderer, a follower of darkness, a man who, thanks to me, lies dead
now under a plastic sheet on the upper landing platform. I mourn the great
loss Hubris has suffered tonight, high custodian, and I wish I had been able
to prevent it. But if I had not been here at all to raise the alarm... well
imagine the tragedy you would be dealing with then.’
I let that sink in.
‘Not just this processional, but all the hibernation tombs... who knows
what Eyclone might have wrought? Who knows what his overall ambition
was?’
‘Eyclone, the recidivist?’
‘He did this, high custodian.’
‘You will brief me on this entire event.’
‘Let me prepare a report and bring it to you. You may have answers for
me too. I will signal you in a few hours for an appointment to meet. I think
you have plenty to deal with right now.’
We made our way out. Betancore presented the junior custodians with a
formal register of evidence to be stored for my inspection. The list included
the casket and the bodies of Eyclone and his men. None would be tampered
with or even searched until I had looked at them. The gunman I had
subdued in the cryogenerator chamber, the only one left alive, would be
incarcerated pending my interrogation. Betancore made these requirements
abundantly clear.
We took Vibben with us. Aemos was too frail, so Betancore and I
handled the plastic-shrouded form on the gurney.
We left Processional Two-Twelve by the main vault doors into the biting
cold of the constant night and carried Vibben down towards a waiting ice-
car, taking her through the hundreds of rows of corpses the Custodians were
laying out on the frozen ground.
MY BAND AND I had deployed onto Hubris the moment we arrived, such
was the urgency of our chase. Now it looked like we would remain here for
at least a week, longer if Carpel proved difficult. As we rode the ice-car
back to the landing cross, I had Aemos make arrangements for our stay.
During Dormant on Hubris, while ninety-nine percent of the planetary
population hibernates, one location remains active. The custodians and the
technomagi weather out the long, bitter darkness in a place called the Sun-
dome.
FIFTY KILOMETRES FROM the vast expanse of the Dormant Plains where
the hibernation tombs stand in rows, the Sun-dome sits like a dark grey
blister in the ongoing winter night. It is home to fifty-nine thousand people,
just a town compared with the great empty cities that slumber below the
horizon line waiting for Thaw to bring their populations back.
I stared out at the Sun-dome as the gun-cutter swept us in towards it
through wind-blown storms of ice. Small red marker lights winked on the
surfaces of the dome and from the masts jutting from the apex.
Betancore flew, silent, concentrating. He had removed his tight-fitting
gloves so that the intricate Glavian circuitry set like silver inlay into his
palms and finger tips could engage with the cutter’s system directly via the
control stick.
Aemos sat in a rear cabin, poring over manuscripts and data-slates. Two
independent multitask servitors waited for commands in the crew-bay The
ship had five in all. Two were limb-less combat units slaved directly to the
gun-pods and the other, the chief servitor, a high-spec model we called
Uclid, never left his duties in the engine room.
Lowink, my astropath, slumbered in his chamber, linked to the vox and
pict systems, awaiting a summons.
Vibben lay shrouded on the cot in her room.
Betancore swung the cutter down towards the dome. After an exchange
of telemetry, a wide blast shutter opened in the side of the dome. The light
that shone out was almost unbearably bright. Betancore engaged the cockpit
glare shields and flew us into the landing bay.
The inside surface of the vast dome was mirrored. A plasma-effect sun-
globe burned high in the roof of the dome, bathing the town below in fierce
white light. The town itself, spread out beneath us, seemed to be made of
glass.
We set down on the wide bay, a twenty-hectare metal platform that
overlooked the town. The surface of the platform gleamed almost white in
the reflected glare. Heavy monotask servitors trundled out and towed us
into a landing silo off the main pad, where pit-servitors moved in to attach
fuel lines and begin fundamental servicing. Betancore didn’t want anybody
or anything touching the gun-cutter, so he ordered Modo and Nilquit, our
two independent servitors, to take over the tasks and send the locals away. I
could hear them moving around the hull, servos whirring, hydraulics
hissing, exchanging machine code data bursts with each other or with Uclid
in the drive chamber.
Aemos offered to find accommodation for us in the town itself, but I
decided a landing berth was all we needed. The gun-cutter was large
enough to provide ample facilities for our stay. We often spent weeks, or
months living aboard it.
I went to Lowink’s small cabin under the cockpit deck and roused him.
He hadn’t been with me long: my previous astropath had been killed trying
to translate a warp-cipher six weeks before.
Lowink was a young man, with a fleshy, unhealthy bulk hanging from a
thin skeletal frame, his body already deteriorating from the demands of a
psyker’s life. Greasy implant plugs dotted his shaved skull, and lined his
forearms like short spines. As he came to the door, some of these plugs
trailed wires, each marked with parchment labels, which led back to the
communications mainbox above his cradle. Thousands of cables spilled or
dangled around his tiny cabin, but he instinctively knew what each one did
and could set and adjust plug-ins at a moment’s notice. The room reeked of
sweat and incense.
‘Master,’ he said. His mouth was a wet pink slit and he had one lazy,
half-hooded eye that gave him a superior air quite belying his actual
timidity.
‘Please send a message for me, Lowink. To the Regal Akwitane.’ The
Regal was a rogue trader we had employed to convey the gun-cutter and
ourselves to Hubris. His vessel awaited us in orbit now, ready to provide
further warp-passage.
‘Give Trade Master Golkwin my respects and tell him we are staying for
now. He can be on his way, there is no point in him waiting. We could be
here for a week or more. The usual form, polite. Tell him I thank him for his
service and hope we may meet again.’
Lowink nodded. ‘I will do it at once.’
‘Then I’d like you to perform some other tasks. Contact the main
Astropathicus Enclave here on Hubris and request a full transcript of off-
world traffic for the past six weeks. Also any record of unlicensed traffic,
individuals using their own astropaths. Whatever they can make available.
And a little threat that it is an inquisitor requiring this data wouldn’t hurt.
They don’t want to find themselves caught up in a major inquisition for
withholding information.’
He nodded again. ‘Will you be requiring an auto-séance?’
‘Not yet, but I will eventually. I will give you time to prepare.’
‘Will that be all, Master?’
I turned to go. ‘Yes, Lowink.’
‘Master...’ he paused. ‘Is it true that the female Vibben is dead?’
‘Yes, Lowink.’
‘Ah. I thought it was quiet.’ He closed the door.
The comment wasn’t as callous as it sounded. I knew what he meant,
though my own psychic abilities were nascent and undeveloped next to his.
Lores Vibben was a latent psyker, and while she had been with us, there had
been a constant background sound, almost subliminal, broadcast
unconsciously by her young, eager mind.
I FOUND BETANCORE outside, standing under the shadow of one of the
gun-cutter’s stubby wings. He was gazing at the ground, smoking a lho-leaf
tube. I didn’t approve of narcotics, but I let it go. He’d cleaned himself up
these past few years. When I’d first met him, he had been an obscura user.
‘Damned bright place,’ he muttered, wincing out at the abominable glare.
‘A typical over reaction. They have eleven months of pitch dark, so they
light their habitat to an excessive degree.’
‘Do they have a night cycle?’
‘I don’t believe so.’
‘No wonder they’re so messed up. Extreme light, extreme dark, extreme
mindsets. Their body clocks and natural rhythms must be all over the
place.’
I nodded. Outside, I had begun to be disarmed by the notion that the
night was never going to end. Now I had the same feelings about this
constant noon. In his brief, Aemos had said the world was called Hubris
because after spending seventy standard years getting here aboard their ark-
fleet, the original colonists had found the surveys had been incorrect.
Instead of enjoying a regular orbit, the world they had selected pursued this
extreme pattern of darkness and light. They’d settled anyway, co-opting the
cryogenerational methods that had got them here as part of their culture. A
mistake, in my view.
But I wasn’t here to offer a cultural critique.
‘Notice anything?’ I asked Betancore.
He made a casual gesture around the landing platform. ‘They don’t get
many visitors in this season. Trade’s all but dead, the world’s on tick-over.’
‘Which is why Eyclone thought it vulnerable.’
‘Yes. Most of the ships here are local, trans-atmospheric. Some are for
the custodians’ use, the others are simply berthed-up over Dormant. I make
three non-locals, aside from us. Two trader launches and a private cutter.’
‘Ask around. See if you can find out who they belong to and what their
business is.’
‘Sure thing.’
‘Eyclone’s pinnace, the one you shot down. Did it come from here?’
He took a suck on his narc-tube and shook his head. ‘Either came from
orbit, or up from some private location. Lowink picked up its transmissions
to Eyclone.’
‘I’ll ask to see those. But it could have come from orbit? Eyclone may
have a starship up there?’
‘Don’t worry, I already thought to look. If there was one there, it’s gone,
and it made no signals.’
‘I’d like to know how that bastard got here, and how he was intending to
leave again.’
‘I’ll find that out,’ said Betancore, crashing the tube stub under his heel.
He meant it.
‘What about Vibben?’ he asked.
‘Do you know what her wishes were? She never mentioned anything to
me. Did she want her remains sent back to Tornish for burial?’
‘You’d do that?’
‘If that was what she wanted. Is it?’
‘I don’t know, Eisenhorn. She never told me either.’
‘Take a look through her effects, see if she left any testament or
instructions. Can you do that?’
‘I’d like to do that,’ he said.
I WAS TIRED by then. I spent another hour with Aemos in his cramped,
data-slate-filled room, preparing a report for Carpel. I set out the basic
details, reserving anything I felt he didn’t need to know. I accounted for my
actions. I made Aemos check them against local law, to prepare myself in
case Carpel raised a prosecution. I wasn’t unduly worried about him, and in
truth I was bulletproof against local legislation, but I wanted to check
anyway. An Amalathian prides himself on working with the structures of
Imperial society, not above or beyond them. Or through them, as a
monodominant might. I wanted Carpel and the senior officials of Hubris on
my side, helping my investigation.
When my report was complete, I retired to my room. I paused by
Vibben’s door, went in, and gently placed the Scipio naval pistol between
her hands on her chest, folding the shroud back afterwards. It was hers, it
had done its work. It deserved to be laid to rest with her.
FOR THE FIRST time in six years, I did not dream about Eyclone. I
dreamed of a blinding darkness, then a light that refused to go away. There
was something dark about the light. Nonsense, I know, but that was how it
felt. Like a revelation that actually carried some grimmer, more profound
truth. There were flashes, like lightning, around the edges of my dream’s
horizon. I saw a handsome, blank-eyed male, not blank-eyed like one of
Eyclone’s drones, but vacant like an immense, star-less distance. He smiled
at me. At that time in my life, I had no idea who he was.
I WENT TO see Carpel at noon the next day. It was always noon in the
Sun-dome, but this was real noon by the clock. By then, Lowink, Aemos
and Betancore had all dredged up new information for me.
I shaved, and dressed in black linen with high boots and a formal jacket
of scaled brown hide. I wore my inquisitorial rosette at my throat. I
intended to show Carpel I meant business.
Aemos and I descended from the landing platform superstructure by
caged elevator and found yellow-robed custodians waiting to escort us.
Despite the rancid white light all around, they still held ignited light poles.
We made short, hard shadows on the dry rockcrete of the concourse as we
crossed to an open limousine. It was a massive chrome-grilled beast with
pennants bearing the Hubris crest fluttering on its cowling. There were four
rows of overstuffed leather benches behind the centre-set driver’s cockpit.
We hummed through the streets on eight fat wheels. The boulevards were
wide and, needless to say, bright. To either hand, glass-fronted buildings
rose towards the blazing plasma sun-globe high above, like flowers seeking
the light. Every thirty metres along every street, chemical lamps on ornate
posts strained to add their own light to the brilliance.
Traffic was sparse, and there were at most a few thousand pedestrians on
the streets. I noticed most wore yellow silk sashes, and that garlands of
yellow flowers decorated every lamp post.
‘The flowers?’ I asked.
‘From the hydroponic farms on east-dome seven,’ one of the custodians
told me.
‘Signifying?’
‘Mourning.’
‘Same as the sashes,’ Aemos whispered in confidence. ‘What happened
last night is a major tragedy for this world. Yellow is their holy colour. I
believe the local religion is a solar belief.’
‘The sun as Emperor?’
‘Common enough. Extreme here, for obvious reasons.’
The custodial hall was a glass spire close to the town centre, a solar disk
overlaid with the double-headed eagle of the Imperium decorating its upper
faces. Nearby was the local chapel of the Ecclesiarchy, and several
buildings given over to the Imperial Administratum. It amused me to see
they were all built of black stone and virtually windowless. Those Imperial
servants stationed here obviously had as little track as me with the constant
light.
We drew in under a glass portico and were escorted into the main hall. It
was seething with people, most of them custodians in yellow robes, some
local officials and technomagi, some clerks and servitors. The hall itself
was of the scale of an Imperial chapel, but raised in yellow-stained glass on
a frame of black cast-iron. The air was full of golden light shafting down
through the glass. The carpet was vast, black, with a sun-disk woven into its
centre.
‘Inquisitor Eisenhorn!’ declared one of my escorts through a vox-hailer.
The hall fell silent, and all turned to watch us approach. High Custodian
Carpel sat on a hovering lifter-throne with gilt decorations. A burning
chemical light was mounted above the head of the floating chair. He swung
in through the parting crowd towards me.
‘High custodian,’ I said with a dutiful nod.
‘They are all dead,’ he informed me. ‘All twelve thousand, one hundred
and forty-two. Processional Two-Twelve is dead. None survived the
trauma.’
‘Hubris has my sincere sympathies, high custodian.’
The hall exploded in pandemonium, voices screeching and shouting and
clamouring.
‘Your sympathies? Your damned sympathies?’ Carpel screamed above
the roar. ‘A great part of our ruling elite die in one night, and we have your
sympathies to console us?’
‘That is all I can offer, high custodian.’ I could feel Aemos shivering at
my side, making aimless notes on his wrist slate about custom and clothing
and language forms... anything to take his mind from the confrontation.
‘That’s hardly good enough!’ spat a young man nearby. He was a local
noble, young and firm enough, but his skin had a dreadful, sweaty pallor
and custodians supported him as he stumbled forward.
‘Who are you?’ I asked.
‘Vernal Maypell, heir-lord of the Dallowen Cantons!’ If he expected me
to fall to my knees in supplication, he was in for a disappointment.
‘Because of the gravity of this event, we have roused some of our
highborn early from their dormancy,’ Carpel said. ‘Liege Maypell’s brother
and two of his wives died in Processional Two-Twelve.’
So the pallor was revival sickness. I noticed that fifty or more of the
congregation present were similarly wasted and ill.
I turned to Maypell.
‘Liege. I repeat, you have my condolences.’
Maypell exploded with rage. ‘Your arrogance astounds me, off-worlder!
You bring this monster to our world, battle with him through our most
sacred sanctums, a private war that slaughters our best and you—’
‘Wait!’ I used my will. I didn’t care. Maypell stopped as if stunned and
the vast hall rang silent. ‘I came here to save you and deny Eyclone’s plans.
But for the efforts of myself and my companions, he might have destroyed
more than one of your hibernation tombs. I broke none of your laws. I was
careful to preserve your codes in pursuit of my work. What do you mean, I
brought this monster here?’
‘We have made enquiries,’ answered an elderly noblewoman nearby.
Like Maypell, she was ailing with revival sickness, and sat hunched on a
litter carried by slaved servitors.
‘What enquiries, madam?’
‘This long feud with the murderer Eyclone. Five years, is it now?’
‘Six, lady.’
‘Six, then. You have hounded him here. Driven him. Brought him, as
Liege Maypell said.’
‘How?’
‘We registered no off-world ship these past twenty days except yours,
Eisenhorn,’ Carpel said, reviewing a data-slate. ‘The Regal Akwitane. That
ship must have brought him as it brought you, to finish your war here and
damn our lives. Did you choose Hubris because it was quiet, out of the way
a place where you might finish your feud undisturbed, in the long dark?’
I was angry by now. I concentrated to control my rage. ‘Aemos?’
Beside me, he was muttering ‘...and what silicate dyes do they use in
their stained glass manufacture? Is the structure armoured? The supports are
early Imperial Gothic in style, but—’
‘Aemos! The report!’
He started and handed me a data-slate from his leather case.
‘Read this, Carpel. Read it thoroughly.’ I pushed it at him – then snatched
it away as he reached for it. ‘Or should I read it aloud to all here assembled?
Should I explain how I came here at the last minute when I learned Eyclone
was moving to Hubris? That I learned that only by astropathic decryption of
a cipher message sent by Eyclone two months ago? A cipher that killed my
astropath in his efforts to translate it?’
‘Inquisitor, I—’ Carpel began.
I held up the data-slate report for them all, thumbing the stud that
scrolled the words across the screen. ‘And what about this? The evidence
that Eyclone has been planning a move against your world for almost a
year? And this, gathered this last night – that an unregistered starship
moved in and out of your orbit to deliver Eyclone three days ago, unnoticed
by your planetary overwatch and the custodian “Guardians”? Or the
itemised stream of astropathic communication that your local enclave
noticed but didn’t bother to source or translate?’
I tossed the slate into Carpel’s lap. Hundreds of eyes stared at me in
shocked silence.
‘You were wide open. He exploited you. Don’t blame me for anything
except being too late to stop him. As I said, you have my sincere
condolences.
‘And next time you choose to confront an Imperial inquisitor,’ I added,
‘you may want to be more respectful. I’m excusing a lot because I
recognise the trauma and loss you have suffered. But my patience isn’t
limitless... unlike my authority.’
I turned to Carpel. ‘Now, high custodian, can we talk? In private, as I
think I requested.’
WE FOLLOWED CARPEL’S floating throne into a side annexe leaving a hall
full of murmuring shocked voices behind us. Only one of his men
accompanied us, a tall, blond fellow in a dark brown uniform I didn’t
recognise. A bodyguard, I presumed. Carpel set his throne down on the
carpet and raised a remote wand that tinted the glass plates of the room at a
touch.
Reasonable light levels at last. From that alone, I knew Carpel was taking
me seriously.
He waved me to a seat opposite. Aemos lurked in the shadows behind
me. The man in brown stood by the windows, watching.
‘What happens now?’ Carpel asked.
‘I expect your full co-operation as I extend my investigation.’
‘But the matter is over,’ said the man in brown.
I kept my gaze on Carpel. ‘I want your consent for me to continue as well
as your full co-operation. Eyclone may be dead, but he was just the blade-
point of a long and still dangerous weapon.’
‘What are you talking about?’ the man in brown snapped.
Still I did not look at him. Staring at Carpel, I said, ‘If he speaks again
without me knowing who he is, I will throw him out of the window. And I
won’t open it first.’
‘This is Chastener Fischig, of the Adeptus Arbites. I wanted him
present.’
Now I looked at the man in brown. He was a heavy-set brute with a loop
of shiny pink scar tissue under one milky eye. I’d taken him to be a young
man with his clean skin and blond hair, but now I studied him, I saw he was
at least my age.
‘Chastener,’ I nodded.
‘Inquisitor,’ he returned. ‘My question stands.’
I sat back in my chair. ‘Murdin Eyclone was a facilitator. A brilliant,
devious man, one of the most dangerous I have ever hunted. Sometimes to
hunt down your prey is to finish his evil. I’m sure you have experience of
that.’
‘You called him a “facilitator”.’
‘That was where his danger lay. He believed he could serve his obscene
masters best by offering his considerable skills to cults and sects that
needed them. He had no true allegiances. He worked to facilitate the grand
schemes of others. What he was doing here on Hubris was to advance and
develop someone else’s plans. Now he is dead, and his scheme thwarted.
We may be thankful. But my task is not done. I must work back from
Eyclone, his men, from any clue he left and dig my way into whatever
greater, secret darkness was employing him.’
‘And for this you want the co-operation of the people of Hubris?’ asked
Carpel.
‘The people, the authorities, you... everyone. This is the Emperor’s work.
Will you shrink from it?’
‘No sir, I will not!’ snapped Carpel.
‘Excellent.’
Carpel tossed a gold solar-form badge to me. It was heavy and old,
mounted on a pad of black leather.
‘This will give you authority. My authority. Conduct your work
thoroughly and quickly. I ask two things in return.’
‘And they are?’
‘You report all findings to me. And you allow the chastener to
accompany you.’
‘I work my own way—’
‘Fischig can open doors and voiceboxes here in the Sun-dome that even
that badge may not. Consider him a local guide.’
And your ears and eyes, I thought. But I knew he was under immense
pressure from the nobility to produce results, so I said: ‘I will be grateful for
his assistance.’
‘Where first?’ Fischig asked, down to business at once, a hungry look on
his face. They want blood, I realised. They want someone to punish for the
deaths, someone they can say they caught, or at least helped to catch. They
want to share in whatever successes I have so that they can look good when
the rest of their population wakes up to this disaster in a few months’ time.
I couldn’t blame them.
‘First,’ I said, ‘the mortuary.’
EYCLONE LOOKED AS if he was asleep. His head had been wrapped in an
almost comical plastic bonnet to contain the wound I had dealt him. Framed
in the plastic, his face was tranquil, with just a slight bruising around the
lips.
He lay on a stone plinth in the chill of the morgue below Arbites
Mortuary One. His brethren lay on numbered plinths around him, those that
had been recovered more or less intact. There were labelled bins of mostly
liquescent material against the back wall, the remains of those that
Betancore had slaughtered with the cutter’s cannons.
The air in the underground vault was lit cold blue, and frost covered
circulators pumped in sub-zero air directly from the ice-desert outside the
Sun-dome. Fischig had provided us all with heat gowns for the visit.
I was impressed by what I saw: both the dutiful care and attention that
had been used to sequester and store the bodies and by the fact that no one
had touched them, according to my instructions. It seems a simple
command to give, but I have lost count of the times that over-eager death-
priests or surgeons have begun autopsies before I arrived.
The mortician superintendent was a haggard woman in her sixties called
Tutrone. She attended us in red plastic scrubs worn over an old and
threadbare heat-gown. Mortress Tutrone had a bionic implant in one eye
socket, and blades and bonesaw manipulators of gleaming surgical steel
built into her right hand.
‘I have done as you instructed,’ she told me as she led us down the spiral
steps into the cold vault. ‘But it is irregular. Rules state I must begin
examinations, prelim examinations at least, as soon as possible.’
‘I thank you for your diligence, mortress. I will be done quickly. Then
you can follow protocol.’
Pulling on surgical gloves, I moved through the lines of dead – there
were nearly twenty of them – dictating observations of Aemos. There was
virtually nothing to be learned from the men. Some I gauged from build and
coloration to be off-worlders, but they had no documents, no surgical
identifiers, no clue whatsoever about their origins or identities. Even their
clothing was blank... manufacturing tags and labels had been torn or burned
off. I could begin a forensic investigation to identify the source of the
clothing, but that would be a massive waste of resources.
On two of them, I found fresh scars that suggested subcutaneous ident
markers had been surgically removed. Ident marking was not a local
practice, so that at least suggested off-world. But where? Hundreds of
Imperial planets routinely used such devices, and their placing and use was
pretty standard. I had carried one myself for a few years, as a child, before
the Black Ships selected me and it was dug out.
One of the corpses had a curious scarring on the forearms, not deep but
thorough, searing the epidermis.
‘Someone has used a melta-torch to remove gang tattoos,’ Aemos said.
He was right. Again, it was tantalisingly incomplete.
I looked to Eyclone, where I thought my best bet lay. With the Mortress’s
help, I cut away his clothes, all of which were as anonymous as his
followers’ garb. We turned his naked corpse, looking for... well, anything.
‘There!’ Fischig said, leaning in. ‘A brand mark above the left buttock.
‘The Seraph of Laoacus. An old Chaos mark. Eyclone had it done to
honour his then-masters twenty years ago. A previous cult, a previous
employer. Nothing to do with this.’
Fischig looked at me curiously. ‘You know the details of his naked
flesh?’
‘I have sources,’ I replied. I didn’t want to have to tell the tale. Eemanda,
one of my first companions, brilliant, beautiful and bold. She had found that
detail out for me. She had been in an asylum now for five years. The last
report I had received said she had eaten away her own fingers.
‘But he marks himself?’ Fischig added. ‘With each new cult he involves
himself in, he carries their mark to show his allegiance?’
The man had a point, damn him. We looked. At least six laser scars on
his body seemed likely to have been previous cult marks, burned off after
he left those associations.
Behind his left ear, a skin inlay of silver was worked in the form of the
Buboe Chaotica.
‘This?’ asked Tutrone, shaving the hair aside with her finger blades to
reveal it.
‘Old, as before.’
I stepped back from the body and thought hard. When I’d killed him, he
had been reaching for something on his belt, or so it had seemed to me.
‘His effects?’
They were laid out on a metal tray nearby. His laspistol, a compact vox-
device, a pearl-inlaid box containing six obscura tubes and an igniter, a
credit tile, spare cells for the gun, a plastic key. And the belt; with four
buttoned pouches.
I opened them one by one: some local coins; a miniature las-knife; three
bars of high-calorie rations; a steel tooth-pick; more obscura, this time in an
injector vial; a small data slate.
At the moment of death, which of these things had he been reaching for?
The knife? Too slow and small to counter a man who has a naval pistol
wedged into your mouth. Then again, he was desperate.
And then again, he hadn’t reached for his bolstered lasgun.
The data-slate, perhaps? I picked it up and activated it, but it needed a
cipher to gain access. All manner of secrets might be locked inside... but
why would a man reach for a data-slate in the face of certain death?
‘Track marks, along the forearm,’ Tutrone stated, continuing her exam.
Hardly surprising, given the narco-ware we’d recovered from him.
‘No rings? No bracelets? Earrings? Piercing studs?’
‘None.’
I pulled a plastic pouch from a dispenser on the surgical cart and put all
his effects into it.
‘You will sign for those, won’t you?’ Tutrone asked, looking up.
‘Of course.’
‘You hated him, didn’t you?’ Fischig said suddenly.
‘What?’
He leaned back against a plinth, crossing his arms. ‘You had him at your
mercy, and you knew his head was full of secrets, but you emptied it with
your gun. I have no compunction when it comes to killing, but I know when
I’m wasting a lead. Was it rage?’
‘I’m an inquisitor. I do not get angry.’
‘Then what?’
I had just about enough of his snide tone. ‘You don’t know how
dangerous this man is. I wasn’t taking chances.’
‘He looks safe enough to me.’ Fischig smirked, looking down at the
body.
‘Here’s something!’ Tutrone called out. We all moved in.
She was working on his left hand, delicately, with her finest gauge
scalpels and probes, her augmented fingers darting like a seamstress.
‘The index finger of the left hand. There’s unusual lividity and swelling.’
She played a small scanner across it.
‘The nail’s ceramite. Artificial. An implant.’
‘What’s inside?’
‘Unknown. A ghost reading. There’s maybe... ah, there it is... a catch
under the quick. You’d need something small to trigger it.’
She adjusted her bionic finger settings and slid out a very thin metal
probe, thin like...
...a tooth pick.
‘Back! Back now!’ I yelled.
It was too late. Tutrone had undone the catch. The false nail sprang back
and something flew out of the cavity in the finger tip. A silver worm, like a
thread of necklace chain, flashed through the air.
‘Where did it go?’
‘I don’t know,’ I said, pushing Tutrone and Aemos behind me. ‘Did you
see it?’ I asked Fischig.
‘Over there,’ he said, pulling a short-nosed gloss-black autopistol out
from his robes.
I reached for my own gun, then remembered I’d given it back to Vibben.
I snatched up a bone knife from the trolley.
The worm slithered back into the light. It was a metre long and several
centimetres thick now. What foul sorcery had caused that expansion, I did
not want to know. It was made of segmented metal, and the head was an
eyeless cone split by a hissing mouth full of razor teeth.
Tutrone cried out as it flew at her. I pushed her down and the thing
whipped across over us, hitting a corpse on a nearby plinth. There was a
dreadful sucking, gnawing sound and the worm disappeared into the
corpse’s torso through a jagged hole.
The corpse vibrated and ruptured, filling the air with a foul mist of
vapour. The worm swished up out of it and disappeared across the floor. By
then, Fischig had opened fire and blasted the shattered corpse off its plinth.
The worm was long since gone.
‘Touch-activated mechanism,’ Aemos was murmuring to himself, ‘very
discrete, probably of Xenos manufacture, a guard weapon, with some mass-
altering system that expands it on contact with air and/or release, hunting by
sound...’
‘So shut up!’ I told him. I bundled him and Tutrone against the far wall.
Fischig and I moved in parallel courses down through the plinth rows,
weapons ready.
It reappeared. By the time I saw it, it was almost on me, thrashing
forward through the air on its metallic tail. In a split second, I reflected that
this was how Eyclone had wanted me to die. This was what he had intended
to unleash against me on the landing platform at Processional Two-Twelve.
Rage made me deny him. I stabbed out and my extended blade jabbed
directly between the gaping teeth and down the gullet. The impact knocked
me back. I found I had the whole, heavy, two-metre thing thrashing on the
end of my knife like a lash.
Shots banged past me. Fischig was trying to hit it.
‘You’ll kill me, you idiot!’
‘Hold it still!’
With a metallic rasping, it was chewing down the blade and the handle
towards my hand.
Tutrone came in from behind me and together we wrestled the powerful,
coiling thing onto a plinth. She activated a bone-saw on her augmetic hand
and sliced down through its neck with a shrill scream of spinning blades.
The body continued to thrash. She grabbed it and dropped it into an acid
trough usually reserved for bio-waste. The hissing head and the knife it was
still chewing away at quickly followed it.
The four of us gazed down at the thrashing remains as they disintegrated.
I looked round at Mortress Tutrone and Fischig.
‘I know which one of you I’d rather have around in a fight,’ I muttered.
Tutrone laughed. Fischig didn’t.
‘WHAT WAS IT?’ Aemos asked me as we raced in Fischig’s landspeeder
through the streets to the Arbites’ headquarters.
‘You guessed more than I know,’ I replied. A gift from his masters,
certainly.’
‘What manner of masters make a thing like that?’
‘Powerful ones, Aemos. The worst kind.’
OUR MEETING AT the Arbites’ grim chambers was brief. At my request,
Fischig had summoned Magus Palastemes, the head of the cryogenerator
technomagi.
He took one look at the casket in the evidence room and said, ‘I have no
idea what it is.’
‘Thank you. That will be all,’ I told him. I turned to Fischig. ‘Have this
sent immediately to my vessel.’
‘It is state’s evidence—’ he began.
‘Who do you work for, Fischig?’
‘The Emperor.’
‘Then pretend I’m him and you won’t be far wrong. Do it.’
HADAM BONZ WAS waiting for us in the interrogation room. He had been
stripped naked, but Fischig assured me nothing of import had been found in
his clothes.
Bonz was the gunman I had laid out in the cryogenerator chamber, the
only one of Eyclone’s men to have survived the night. His mouth was
swollen from my blow. He had admitted nothing except his name.
Fischig, Aemos and I entered the room, a dull stone box. Bonz was
shackled to a metal chair and looked terrified.
So should he, I thought.
‘Tell me about Murdin Eyclone,’ I said.
‘Who?’ The darkness had gone from his eyes now, Eyclone’s spell
broken. He was bewildered and confused.
‘Then tell me the last thing you remember.’
‘I was on Thracian Primaris. That was my home. I was a stevedore in the
docks. I remember going to a bar with a friend. That is all.’
‘The friend?’
‘A dock master called Wyn Eddon. We got drunk, I think.’
‘Did Eddon mention an Eyclone?’
‘No. Look, where am I? These bastards won’t say. What I am supposed
to have done?’
I smiled. ‘You tried to kill me for a start.’
‘You?’
‘I’m an Imperial inquisitor.’
At that, terror made him lose control of his body functions. He began
pleading, begging, telling us all sorts of misdemeanours, none of which
mattered.
I knew from the first moments that he was useless. Just a mesmerised
slave, chosen for his muscle, knowing nothing. But we spent two hours with
him anyway. Fischig slowly turned a wall dial near the door that vented in
increasing measures of the sub-zero air outside the Sun-dome. In our heat
gowns, we asked questions over and again.
When Bonz’s flesh began to adhere to the metal chair, we knew there was
nothing more.
‘Warm him up and feed him well,’ Fischig told his men as we left the
cell. ‘We execute him at dawn.’
I didn’t ask if that meant some arbitrary time in the next cycle or real
dawn, six months away, at the start of Thaw.
I didn’t much care.
FISCHIG LEFT US to our own devices for a while, and I ate lunch with
Aemos at a public bistro almost directly under the Sun-dome. The food was
sour, rehashed from freeze-dried consumables, but at least it was hot.
Fountain banks projected walls of water around the edges of the bistro so
that the sun-globe light made rainbows that criss-crossed the tables and
aisles. On this sombre day of mourning, there were no other diners present.
Aemos was in good spirits. He chatted away, making connections I
hadn’t begun to see. For all his faults, he possessed a superb mind. Every
hour I spent with him, I learned more techniques.
He was forking up fish and rice and reviewing his data slate.
‘Let’s look at the transmission lag that Lowink detected in the messages
Eyclone sent and received while on the planet.’
‘They’re all in cipher. Lowink hasn’t unlocked them yet.’
‘Yes, yes, but look at the lag. This one... eight seconds... that’s from a
ship in orbit... and the timeframe matches that period in which we know
Eyclone’s mysterious starship was here. But this... during your struggle
with him last night. A lag of twelve and a half minutes. That’s from another
system.’
I stopped trying to macerate a lump of meat that resembled a slug and
peered over. I’d never much considered the blurry side-bar that edged all
astropathic message forms before.
‘Twelve and a half? You’re sure?’
‘I had Lowink check.’
‘So that gives us a reference frame?’
He smiled, pleased I was pleased. ‘Three worlds in the picture. All
between eleven and fifteen minutes’ lag of here. Thracian Primaris, Kobalt
II and Gudrun.’
Thracian Primaris was no surprise. That had been our last port of call, our
last sighting of Eyclone. And, as far as we knew from the wretched Bonz,
the place where he had recruited some or all of his servants.
‘Kobalt’s a nothing. I checked. Just an Imperial watch station. But
Gudrun—’
‘A primary trade world. Old culture, old families—’
‘Old poisons,’ he finished with a laugh, completing the proverb.
I dabbed my mouth with a napkin. ‘Can we be more certain?’
‘Lowink’s researching for me. Once we break the cipher... I don’t mean
the message cipher itself, I mean the coded headers to the actual text, we’ll
know.’
‘Gudrun...’ I pondered.
My vox-link chimed in my ear. It was Betancore.
‘Ever hear of a thing called the Pontius?’
‘No. Why?’
‘I haven’t either, but Lowink’s cracking some of the old transcripts. In
the weeks before Eyclone arrived, someone was sending messages off the
approved links to a location in the Sun-dome. They talk about the delivery
of “The Pontius”. It’s all rather vague and indirect.’
‘Do you have a location?’
‘Why else do you employ us? Thaw-view 12011, on the west side of the
dome, the high-rent quarter. Aristo turf.’
‘Any names?’
‘No, they’re very exclusive and coy about such things.’
‘We’re on it.’
Aemos and I rose from the table. We turned to find Fischig standing
there. He was wearing the full flak armour, carapace and visored helm of an
Arbites now. I have to admit the effect was impressive.
‘Going somewhere without me, inquisitor?’
‘Going to find you, actually. Take us to Thaw-view.’
FOUR
The Sun-dome toured at speed.
Thaw-view 12011.
Questioning Saemon Crotes.
THE WEALTHIEST HUBRITES kept winter palaces on the west perimeter of
the Sun-dome. According to Chastener Fischig, they ‘enjoyed both light
and dark’ as if that was something indulgent. They looked inwards to the lit
dome and had shutters that could be opened to view the dark landscape of
the winter desert. It was a spiritual thing, Aemos suggested.
Fischig shut down his terrain-following guidance as we sliced through
the streets, and his heavy speeder rose up above the traffic and buildings.
We hooked hard turns between glass spires and roared west.
I think he was showing off.
In the rear seating, under the roll-bars, Aemos clung on and closed his
eyes with a soft groan. I rode up front with the armoured Fischig, seeing a
predatory grin on his face under the visor of his Arbites helmet.
The speeder was a standard Imperial model, painted matt-brown and
sporting the badges of the solar symbol and the chevrons and tail number of
the local Arbites. Armoured, it turned heavily, the anti-grav straining to
keep us aloft. There was a heavy bolter pintle-mounted forward of my seat.
I glanced around and saw a locked rack of combat shotguns behind the rear
seats.
‘Give me one of those!’ I yelled above the slipstream and the choppy
thrum of the turbo-fans.
‘What?’
‘I need a weapon!’
Fischig nodded and keyed a security code into a pad built into his bulky
control stick. The cage on the gun-rack popped. ‘Take one!’ Aemos handed
one over to me, and I began loading shells.
THAW-VIEW ROSE before us, a terrace of luxurious crystal-glass and
ferrocrete dwellings built into the curve of the dome itself. We whipped low
over stepped gardens, making ferns and palms shudder in our downwash.
Then Fischig keyed the fans to idle and we settled on a wide veranda
deck, eight storeys up.
He leapt out, racking his shotgun.
I followed him.
‘Stay here,’ I told Aemos. He needed no further encouragement.
‘Which one?’ Fischig asked.
‘12011.’
We edged along the wide, curving deck, clambering over dividing rails
and trellises of climbing flowers.
12011 was glass-fronted, with wide sliding doors of mirrored window-
plate.
Fischig swept up a warning hand, and took a coin from his pocket. He
flipped it onto the terrace and it was atomised by nine separate las-beams.
He keyed his vox. ‘Chastener Fischig to Arbites control, copy?’
‘Copy, chastener.’
‘Access dome central and shut down auto-defences on Thaw-view 12011.
Immediate.’
A pause.
‘Shut down authorised.’
He made to step forward. I halted him and tossed a coin of my own.
It bounced twice on the basalt terrace and rolled to a halt.
‘I like to be sure,’ I said.
We came up either side of the main picture window. Fischig tried the
slider but it was locked.
He stepped back, apparently preparing to shoot the window in.
‘It’s arma-plex,’ I told him, rapping my knuckles off the material. ‘Don’t
be stupid.’
I pulled the plastic bag containing Eyclone’s effects from my jacket and
searched for the compact las-knife. Before I found it, I found the plastic
key.
Slim chances but what the crud, as Inquisitor Hapshant used to say.
I slid the key into the frame lock and the window slid aside on motorised
rails.
We both waited. Perfumed air and light orchestral music wafted out past
us.
‘Adeptus Arbites! Make yourselves known!’ Fischig bellowed, his voice
amplified by his helmet speaker.
They did.
Rapid gunfire, heavy calibre, blew away the terrace rail, decapitated
potted shrubs and dwarf trees, cropped flower beds, and chopped down the
deck’s aerial mast.
‘Have it your way!’ bellowed Fischig and rolled in, pumping his shotgun.
The blasts were deafening.
I clambered up a drain-spout onto the second level balcony, my shotgun
dangling around my shoulders on its strap. Furious exchanges of fire
rumbled below me.
I went in through a gauze-draped opening into the main bedrooms.
The room was over-warm and dark, dressed in red velvet with soothing,
ambient music welling from hidden vox-speakers. The bed was in disarray.
In one corner, on a gilt credenza, sat a portable vox-set. I padded forward
and studied the responder log. Fischig’s chaos down below rumbled through
the floor like a distant storm.
The girl came out of a side room, a bathroom I imagine, and shrieked
when she saw me. She was naked, and dived under the bedclothes for cover.
The muzzle of my shotgun tracked her.
‘Who’s here?’
She whimpered and shook her head.
‘Inquisition,’ I hissed. ‘Who’s here?’
She began to sob and shook her head again.
‘Stay down. Get under the bed if you can.’
In the adjoining room, I heard whistling. A voice called out a name.
‘Don’t answer,’ I told the weeping girl.
I moved slowly round to the side room door. Light shone out. There was
a hint of steam and a smell of bath-oils. The whistling had stopped.
He was wary, I’ll give him that. He didn’t bluster out, gun blasting.
I tipped open the door with the snout of my weapon and five high
velocity rounds shredded holes in the wood panel.
I fell to my belly on the floor and fired three shots in through the door
gap—
‘Inquisition! Throw down your weapon!’
Two more shots punched through the door.
I crawled backwards from the doorway and stood up, the gun resting in
my hands.
‘Come out,’ I said, using my will.
A large, tattooed, naked male blundered out of the bathroom, half his
face shaved and half covered with sudsy foam. A Tronsvasse Hi-Power
autopistol was still in one hand.
‘Put it down,’ I commanded.
He hesitated, as if my will had no force. A conditioned mind, I supposed.
Take no chances.
The autopistol was just pulling up to find me when I blew off his half-
shaved face with the shotgun and sent his body splintering back through the
half-open door.
The girl was still crouched, naked, at the end of the bed, shivering. I was
surprised she hadn’t bolted out of cover at my command too.
I spun to face her.
‘What’s your name?’
‘Lise B.’
‘Full name!’ I snapped. I wasn’t concentrating on her especially, but
there was something about her. An air. A tone.
‘Alizabeth Bequin! Pleasure girl! I worked the Sun-dome these past four
Dormants!’
‘You’re here why?’
‘They paid up front! Wanted a party! Oh lords...’
Her voice trailed away and she collapsed on the bed.
‘Get dressed. Stay here. I will want to talk to you.’
I moved to the door of the chamber and looked out into the unlit hall.
Below, down the stairwell, gunflashes and shouts echoed up.
Seeing my shape in the doorway, a man ran towards me.
‘Wylk! Wylk! They’ve found us! They’ve—’
A moment before he realised I was not Wylk, I decked him with the butt
of my weapon. He fell hard.
Two solid shots raked the doorframe next to me.
I ducked back in, sliding back the grip of the shotgun.
Shots punched through the wall above the bed-head. Bequin screamed
and rolled off the bed.
I blasted back, punching two more large holes in the door.
Two men slammed into the room, wild-eyed and desperate. Both were
dressed in light interior clothes. One had a laspistol, the other an autorifle.
I dropped the lasgunner with one direct shot that hurled his body against
the wall. The man with the autorifle opened fire, his shots chewing through
one of the bed-posts.
I dived for cover as the automatic fire ripped up tufts of carpet, shattered
mirrors and demolished furnishings.
Rolling, I frantically sought cover.
My would-be killer dropped face-down onto the bed. The girl pulled a
long retractable knife out of the back of his neck.
‘I saved your life,’ she told me. ‘That’ll make it better for me, right?’
I TOLD THE girl to stay put in the bedroom, and from her nod I was pretty
sure she would.
I stepped out into the gloomy hall. The level below had fallen silent.
‘Fischig?’ I voxed.
‘Come down,’ his reply crackled back.
A spiral stairway led down into a large, split-level lounge area. The air
was thick with smoke, which coiled out of the terrace window-doors we had
opened. The hard daylight of the Sun-dome streamed in, making ladder-bars
of light in the drifting haze. The opposite wall of the room was a wide
segmented shutter. If opened, it would reveal a view over the freezing
wastes beyond the dome.
A storm of gunfire had ruined the expensive furniture and decorative
fittings. Five corpses lay twisted at various points on the floor. Fischig, his
visor raised, was hauling a sixth man up into a high-backed chair. The man,
wounded in the right shoulder, was wailing and crying. Fischig cuffed him
into place.
‘Upstairs?’ Fischig asked me without looking round.
‘Clear,’ I reported.
I walked round the room, eyeing the dead and examining items left
scattered on tabletops and bureaux.
‘I know some of these men,’ the chastener added, unsolicited. ‘Those two
by the window. Locals, low-grade labourers. Long list of petty convictions
on both.’
‘Hired muscle.’
‘Seems to be your man’s way. The others are off-worlders.’
‘You’ve found papers?’
‘No, it’s just a hunch. None of them have got any ID or markers, and I
haven’t found a cache anywhere.’
‘What about this one?’ I walked over to join him by the prisoner he had
cuffed to the chair. The man coughed and whined, rolling his eyes. Unless
he possessed unnaturally boosted strength thanks to drugs or hidden
augmetics, this man wasn’t muscle. He was older, spare of frame, with
grizzled salt and pepper growth on his chin.
‘You didn’t kill this one deliberately, did you?’ I asked Fischig. He
smiled slightly, as if pleased that I had noticed.
‘I—I have rights!’ The man spat suddenly.
‘You are in the custody of the Imperial Inquisition,’ I told him frankly.
‘You have no rights whatsoever.’
He fell silent.
‘Off-worlder,’ Fischig said. I raised an eyebrow. ‘Accent,’ Fischig
explained.
I’d never have detected it myself. This was one of the reasons I used
local help whenever I got the chance, even a potential troublemaker like the
chastener. My work takes me from world to world, culture to culture. Slight
differences in dialect or incongruities of slang regularly pass me by. But
Fischig had heard it at once. And it made sense. If this was a leader rather
than muscle, one of Eyclone’s chosen lieutenants, then the odds were he
was from off-world.
‘Your name?’ I asked.
‘I will not answer.’
‘Then I will not have that wound treated for a while.’
He shook his head. The wound was bad and he was obviously in
considerable pain, but he resisted. I was even more certain he was a
ringleader. He was no longer shaking or whining. He had switched in some
mental conditioning, no doubt taught by Eyclone.
‘Mind tricks won’t help you,’ I said. ‘I’m much better at them than you
are.’
‘Go screw yourself.’
I glanced at Fischig out of courtesy. ‘Brace yourself.’ He stepped back.
‘Tell me your name,’ I said, using my will.
The man in the chair spasmed. ‘Saemon Crotes!’ he gasped.
‘Godwyn Fischig,’ spat the chastener involuntarily. He blushed and
moved away busying himself with a search.
‘Very well, Saemon Crotes, where are you from?’ I didn’t employ any
will now. In my experience, it took only one blow to loosen mental
defences.
‘Thracian Primaris.’
‘What was your job there?’
‘I was trade envoy for the Bonded Merchant Guild of Sinesias.’
I knew the name. Guild Sinesias was one of the largest mercantile
companies in the sector. It had holdings on a hundred-plus planets and links
to the Imperial nobility. It also, as Betancore had informed me just that
morning, had a trade launch berthed at the Sun-dome landing stage.
‘And what work brought you to Hubris?’
‘That same work... as a trade-envoy.’
‘In Dormant?’
‘There is always trade to be had. Long-term contracts with the authorities
on this world that require the personal touch.’
‘And if I contact your guild, will it confirm this?’
‘Of course.’
I walked around behind him. ‘So what brought you here? To these private
apartments?’
‘I was a guest.’
‘Of who?’
‘Namber Wylk, a local trader. He invited me for a mid-Dormant feast.’
‘This dwelling is registered to Namber Wylk,’ Fischig put in. ‘A trader,
as he says, no priors. I don’t know him.’
‘What about Eyclone?’ I asked Crotes, leaning down to stare into his
eyes. There was a ripple of fear in them.
‘Who?’
‘Your real employer. Murdin Eyclone. Don’t make me ask you again.’
‘I don’t know any Eyclone!’ There was a ring of truth to his voice. He
may well not have known Eyclone by that name.
I dragged up a chair and sat down facing him. ‘There is an awful lot of
your story that doesn’t add up. You’re found here consorting with
recidivists who we can connect to a planetary conspiracy. There are charges
of murder to be considered – a lot of them. We can continue this in far more
intimate and comprehensive circumstances, or you can make me like you
more by filling in some details now.’
‘I... don’t know what to tell you.’
‘Whatever you know. About the Pontius, perhaps?’
A dark, stricken look crossed his face. His jaw worked for a moment,
trying to form words. He quivered. Then there was a liquid pop and his
head fell forward.
‘Throne of Light!’ Fischig cried.
‘Damn it,’ I growled, and bent down to lift Crotes’s limp skull. He was
dead. Eyclone had left failsafes in the conditioning that would trigger at
certain subjects. The Pontius evidently was one of those.
‘A stroke. Artificially induced.’
‘So we know nothing?’
‘We know a great deal! Weren’t you listening? For a start we know the
Pontius is the most precious secret they protect.’
‘So tell me about it?’
I was about to, at least evasively, when the shutter barring the far wall to
the climate extremes of the world outside the dome blew out. Hidden
charges fired simultaneously. The metal sheet splayed outwards into the
freezing dark. The blast-force threw both Fischig and myself to the ground.
A millisecond later, the shattered crystal in the portal blew back in at us,
carried by the hurricane power of the Dormant winds outside – a blizzard of
billions of razor-sharp slivers.
FIVE
Covered traces.
The Glaws of Gudrun.
Unwelcome companions.
DEAFENED BY THE blast, I had wit enough left to grab Fischig and roll
with him out through the terrace doors as the emergency shutter clanked
down from its slit in the hardwood ceiling. We lay panting and half-blind on
the terrace, the hard light and warmth of the Sun-dome thawing our cold-
shocked bodies.
Alarms and warning bells sounded all along the Thaw-view residences.
Arbites units were already on their way.
We got up. Our clothes and simple good fortune had protected us from
the worst of the glass-storm, though I had a gash straight down my left
cheek that would need closing, and Fischig had a long splinter of glass
embedded in his thigh between armour joints. Apart from that, we had just
superficial scratches.
‘Bad timing?’ he asked, though he knew it wasn’t.
‘The charges were set off by the same spasm that killed Crotes.’
He glanced away and rebuckled one of his gauntlets, giving himself time
to think. His face was a dingy grey colour, mainly through shock. But I
think he was now beginning to understand the resources and capabilities of
the people we worked against. Their abominable crime at Processional
Two-Twelve had demonstrated the scale of their malice, but he hadn’t seen
that first hand. Now he was witnessing the fanatical servants of a dark
cause, men who would fight without hesitation to the death. And he had
seen how brutally they would cover their traces, using mental-weapons and
brain-wired booby traps that spoke of vast resources and frightening
sophistication.
Arbites squads moved into the dwelling and secured it while local
medicae servitors patched our wounds. The clearance squads brought out
the shivering girl, Bequin. She was wrapped in blankets and her face was
pinched blue with cold. Under my seal and instruction, they placed her in
custody. She was too cold to voice a complaint.
Fischig and I re-entered wearing heat-gowns. It would be another two or
three hours before engineer teams could replace the outer shutter. From the
harsh light of the terrace, we passed through three hastily hung insulation
curtains into the dim, blue twilight of the apartment. The far wall was gone
and we looked directly into the clear, glassy night of Hubris, a glossy grey
landscape of stark shadows and backscattered light stretching away from
the edge of the Sun-dome. Once more I was exposed to the piercing cold of
Dormant and my blood ached.
The main room where we had questioned Crotes was a gutted cavity,
blackened by soot and jewelled with glass. Hard lacquers of frost caked
furniture surfaces and twisted the faces of the dead. Blood spilt by the
shredding storm of glass was crusted like rubies in the dark.
We played the smoky white beams of our lamps around. I doubted we
would find much now. There was a good chance any valuable documents
had been set to burn or delete on the same trigger signal that had blown the
shutter and killed Crotes. And it also seemed likely these people carried all
truly important information internally, as memory engrams, or meme-codes,
the sort of techniques usually reserved for the higher echelons of diplomatic
corps, the Administratum and elite trade delegations.
That turned my mind back to Crotes’s employer, the Guild Sinesias.
‘IT’S A COMMON enough name in this sub-sector,’ Aemos told me back in
the comfortable half-light of the gun-cutter in its landing platform berth. He
had been researching the name ‘Pontius’. ‘I’ve turned up over half a million
citizens with that forename, another two hundred thousand with it as a
middle name, plus another forty or fifty thousand spelling variants.’
He waved a data-slate at me. I brushed it aside, and used a hand mirror to
study the line of metal butterfly sutures in the wound in my cheek.
‘What about the definite article?’
‘I have over nine thousand marks with that connection,’ he sighed. He
began to read them from his slate list. ‘The Pontius Swellwin Youth
Academy, The Pontius Praxitelles Translation Bureau, The Pontius Gyvant
Ropus Investment Financiary, The Pontius Spiegel Microsurgical Hospi—’
‘Enough.’ I sat at the codifier, typing in name groups. Flickering runes
hunted and darted across the view-plate. Text extracts drifted into focus. I
searched through them by eye, my finger resting on the scroll bar.
‘Pontius Glaw,’ I said.
He blinked and looked at me. There was a half-smile of scholarly delight
on his narrow face. ‘Not on my lists.’
‘Because he is dead?’
‘Because he’s dead.’
Aemos came over and looked across my shoulder at the screen. ‘But it
makes a sort of sense.’
It did. A kind of illogic that had the flavour of truth. The sort of spore an
inquisitor gets a nose for after a few years.
The Glaw family was old blood, a thrusting noble dynasty that had been
a main player in this sub-sector for almost a millennium. The primary
familial holdings and estates were on Gudrun, a world that had already
come to our attention. House Glaw was also a major shareholder and
investor in the Regal Bonded Merchant Guild of Sinesias, so the codifier
had just revealed to me.
‘Pontius Glaw...’ I murmured.
Pontius Glaw had been dead for more than two hundred years. The
seventh son of Oberon Glaw, one of the great patriarchs of that line, he had
suffered the fate of most junior siblings in that there had been precious little
for him to inherit once his older brothers had taken their turn. His eldest
brother, another Oberon, had become lord of the house; the second eldest
had been gifted the control of the stock-holdings; the third had taken on the
captaincy of the House Militia; the fourth and fifth had married politically
and entered the Administratum at high level... and so it went.
From what I remembered of Pontius Glaw’s biography, required reading
as a trainee, Pontius had become a dilettante, wasting his life, his robust
virility, charisma and finely educated intellect in all manner of worthless
pursuits. He had gambled away a significant measure of his personal
fortune, then rebuilt it on the revenues of slave-trading and pit-fighting. A
ruthless sliver of brutality stained his record.
And then, in his forties, with his health ruined by years of abuse, he
turned to a much darker path. It has always been suspected that this turn
was triggered by some chance event: an artefact or document that fell into
his hands, perhaps the strange beliefs of some of the more barbaric pit-
fighters he enslaved. Instinct told me the propensity had always been within
him, and that he was looking for a chance to let it flourish. It is documented
he was a life-long collector of rare and often prohibited books. At what
point might his appetite for licentious and esoteric pornography have spilled
over into the heretical and blasphemous?
Pontius Glaw became a disciple of Chaos, a devotee of the most
abominable and obscene forces that haunt this galaxy. He drew a coven
around him, and over a period of fifteen years committed unspeakable and
increasingly brazen acts of evil.
He was slain eventually, his coven along with him, on Lamsarrote, by an
inquisitorial purge led by the great Absalom Angevin. House Glaw
participated in this overthrow, desperate to be seen to distance themselves
from his crimes. It is likely this alone prevented the entire family from
being pulled down with him.
A monster, a notorious monster. And dead, as Aemos had been so quick
to point out. Dead for more than two centuries.
But the name and the connection of facts seemed too obvious to ignore.
I WANDERED UP to the cockpit and sat with Betancore. ‘We’ll need
passage off-world, to Gudrun.’
‘I’ll arrange it. It may be a day or two.’
‘As fast as you can.’
I SENT WORD TO High Custodian Carpel, informing him of some, though
not all, of my findings and telling him I would shortly be leaving to
continue my investigations on Gudrun. I was reading through the
confidential case records of Inquisitor Angevin when two Arbites brought
Bequin to my gun-cutter. I had sent orders for her to be delivered into my
charge.
She stood in the crew-bay, frowning in the gloom, cuffed. She had
dressed in a tawdry gown and a light cloak, but despite the cheapness of her
garb and the discomfort she was in, her considerable beauty was plain to
see. Good bones, a full mouth, fierce eyes and long dark hair. Yet, again,
there was that air about her, that tone I had detected before. Despite her
obvious physical attractions, there was something almost repellent about
her. It was curious, but I was convinced I knew what it was.
She glanced round as I entered the crew-bay, her expression a mix of fear
and indignation.
‘I helped you!’ she spat.
‘You did. Though I neither asked for nor needed your help.’
She pouted. That air was stronger now, an unpleasant feeling that made
me want to bundle her out of the cutter and have done with her then and
there.
‘The Arbites say they will charge me with murder and conspiracy.’
‘The Arbites desperately want someone to pin the crimes on. You are
unhappily involved in those matters, though I don’t believe deliberately.’
‘Damn right!’ she snarled. ‘This has ruined me, my life here! Just when I
was getting things together.’
‘Your life has been difficult?’
She fixed me with a sneer that questioned my intelligence. I’m a pleasure
girl, an object, it seemed to say, lowest of the low... how difficult do you
think my life has been?
I stepped forward and removed the Arbites’ cuffs. She rubbed her wrists
and looked at me in surprise.
‘Sit down,’ I told her. I was using the will.
She looked at me again, as if wondering what the funny tone was all
about, and then calmly took a seat on a padded leather bench along the
crew-bay’s back wall.
‘I can make sure the charges are dropped,’ I told her. ‘I have that
authority. Indeed, my authority is the only reason you haven’t been charged
or interrogated so far.’
‘Why would you do that?’
‘I thought you believed I owed you?’
‘Doesn’t matter what I believe.’ There was sullen cast to her face as she
looked me up and down. I found myself intrigued. Objectively, I was
looking at a girl whose looks and vivacious spirit made her undeniably
desirable. Yet I... I almost wanted to shout at her, to drive her away, to get
her out of my sight. I had an entirely unwarranted and instinctive loathing
for her.
‘Even if you clear me, I can’t carry on here. They’ll hound me out. I’ll be
marked as trouble. That’ll be the end of my work. I’ll have to move on
again.’ She stared down at the floor and muttered a curse. ‘Just when I was
getting it together!’
‘Move on? You’re not from Hubris?’
‘This miserable shit-pit?’
‘Where then?’
‘I came here from Thracian Primaris four years ago.’
‘You were born on Thracian?’
She shook her head. ‘Bonaventure.’
That was half a sector away. ‘How did you get from Bonaventure to
Thracian?’
‘By way of this and that. Here and there. I’ve travelled a lot. Never
stayed put very long.’
‘Because things get difficult?’
The sneer again. ‘That’s right. I’d stuck it out here longer than anywhere.
Now that’s all screwed up.’
‘Stand up,’ I snapped suddenly, using the will again.
She paused and shrugged at me. ‘Make your mind up.’ She got to her
feet.
‘I want to ask you some questions about the men who employed you at
Thaw-view 12011.’
‘I thought you might.’
‘If you answer helpfully, I can cut you a deal.’
‘What sort of deal?’
‘I can take you to Gudrun. Give you a chance to make a new start. Or I
can offer you employment, if you’re interested.’
She smiled quizzically. It was the first positive expression I had seen on
her. It made her more beautiful, but I didn’t like her any better.
‘Employment? You’d employ me? An inquisitor would employ me?’
‘That’s right. Certain services I think you can provide.’
She took two fluid steps over to me and placed her hands flat against my
chest. ‘I see,’ she said. ‘Even big bad inquisitors have needs, huh? That’s
fine.’
‘You misunderstand,’ I replied, pushing her back as politely as I could.
Physical contact with her made the unnatural feeling of revulsion even
stronger. ‘The services I have in mind will be new to you. Not the sort of
work you are accustomed to. Are you still interested?’
She set her head on one side and considered me. ‘You’re an odd one, all
right. Are all inquisitors like you?’
‘No.’
I ORDERED THE servitor, Modo, to provide her with refreshment and left
her in the crew-bay. Betancore was stood in the shadows outside the door,
gazing in at her appreciatively.
‘She’s a fine sight,’ he murmured to me as if I might not have noticed.
‘You forget Vibben so quickly?’
He snapped round at me, stung. ‘That was low, Eisenhorn. I was just
commenting.’
‘You’ll like her less when you get to know her. She’s an untouchable.’
‘Seriously?’
‘Seriously. A psychic blank. It’s natural, and I haven’t tested her limits.
It’s all I can do to be in the same room as her.’
‘Such a looker too,’ Betancore sighed, gazing back in at her.
‘Useful to us. If she passes certain requirements, I’m going to employ
her.’
He nodded. Untouchables were rare, and almost impossible to create
artificially. They have a negative presence in the warp that renders them
virtually immune to psychic powers, which in turn makes them potent anti-
psyker weapons. The side-effect of their psychic blankness is the unpleasant
disturbance that accompanies them, the waves of fear and revulsion they
trigger in those they meet.
No wonder her life had been difficult and friendless.
‘News?’ I asked Betancore.
‘Made contact with a sprint trader called the Essene. Master’s one Tobias
Maxilla. Deals in small units of luxury goods. Coming here in two days to
deliver a consignment of vintage wines from Hesperus, then on to Gudrun.
For a fee, he’ll make room for the cutter in his hold.’
‘Good work. So we’ll be on Gudrun when?’
‘Two weeks.’
I SPENT THE next hour or so interviewing Bequin, but as I suspected she
knew precious little about any of the men. We gave her accommodation in a
small bunk-cell next to Betancore’s quarters. It was scarcely more than a
box, and Nilquit had to remove piles of stowed equipment to clear it, but
she seemed pleased enough. When I asked her if she had any possessions
she wished to collect from the Sun-dome, she simply shook her head.
I WAS REVIEWING yet more piles of data with Aemos when Fischig
arrived. He was dressed in his brown serge uniform suit and carried two
bulky holdalls over his shoulder, which he dropped to the deck with a
declamatory thump as he stepped aboard.
‘To what do I owe this visit, chastener?’ I asked.
He showed me a slate bearing Carpel’s official seal. ‘The high custodian
grants you permission to leave to pursue your inquiry. Dependent on this...’
I reviewed the slate and sighed.
‘I’m coming with you,’ he said.
SIX
Divination by auto-séance.
A dream.
Joining the Essene.
I LODGED A formal complaint with the high custodian’s office, but it was
simply for show. Carpel could manufacture serious problems for me if I
tried to leave without his agent. I could do that, of course. I could do as I
liked. But Carpel could delay me, and I didn’t know how much co-
operation from the elders and administrations of Hubris I’d need later if any
part of this investigation led to trial.
Besides, Carpel knew I was going on to Gudrun, and he would plainly
send Fischig there under an Arbites warrant to investigate anyway. On the
whole, I decided I’d rather have Chastener Fischig where I could see him.
ON THE AFTERNOON before our intended departure, I had Lowink prepare
for an auto-séance. I doubted whether anything further could be learned
now, but I wanted to cover every avenue.
As usual, we used my quarters, with the cabin-door locked, and
Betancore strictly instructed to prevent interruptions. I sat in a high-back
armchair, and spent some quarter of an hour lowering my mind to a semi-
trance state. This was an old technique, one of the first I had been taught
when my abilities had originally been detected by the tutors of the
Inquisition. On a cloth-covered table between us, Lowink laid out key
evidence items: some of Eyclone’s effects, some other pieces taken from
Thaw-view 12011, and some from the processional. We also had the
mysterious casket from the cryogenerator chamber.
Once he was satisfied I was ready, Lowink opened his mind to the warp,
and filtered its raging influence through his highly trained mental
architecture. This transitional moment was always a shock, and I shuddered.
The temperature in the room dropped palpably, and a glass bowl on a side
counter cracked spontaneously. Lowink was murmuring, his eyes rolled
back, twitching and jerking slightly.
I closed my eyes, though I could still see my room. What I was seeing
was a visualisation of our surroundings constructed by Lowink
astropathically in the Empyrean itself. Everything shone with a pale blue
light from within, and solids became translucent. The dimensions of the
room shifted slightly, stretching and buckling as if they had difficulty
retaining their coherence.
I took up the items on the table in turn, Lowink’s projection enhancing
their psychometric qualities, opening my mind’s abilities to the signatures
and resonances they carried in the warp.
Most were dull and blunt, with no trace of resonance. Some had wispy
tendrils of auras around them, relics of passing contact with human hands
and human minds. Eyclone’s vox-device buzzed with the distant,
unintelligible whinings of ghosts but gave up nothing.
Eyclone’s pistol stung my hand like a scorpion when I touched it – and
both I and Lowink gasped. I had a brief aftertaste of death. I decided not to
touch it again.
His data-slate, which Aemos had yet been unable to open, was dripping
with a sticky, almost gelatinous aura. The thickness of the psychic residue
betokened the complex thought processes and data that had adhered to it. It
gave up nothing, and I became frustrated. Lowink amplified my scrutiny
and at last, as a whisper, I landed the word, or name, ‘daesumnor’.
The final item for inspection was the casket. It resonated brightly with
flickering bands of warp-traces. Our contact with it was necessarily brief
because of the exhausting strength of its halo.
We probed, opening what seemed to be three levels of psychometric
activity. One was sharp and hard, and tasted of metal. Lowink averred that
this was a relic of the intellect or intellects that had crafted the casket. An
undeniably brilliant but malevolent presence.
Beneath that, colder, smaller, denser, like a lightless collapsed star, lay a
heavy, throbbing trace that seemed to be locked in the heart of the casket’s
machine core.
Around both, fluttering and swooping like birds, were the vestigial
psychic agonies of the dead from Processional Two-Twelve. Their plaintive
psychic noise rippled through our thoughts and sapped the emotional
strength from us both. The dead souls of the processional had left their
psychic fingerprints on this device that had been instrumental in their
murder.
We were about to step back and end the séance when the second trace,
the cold, distant, dense one, began to well up to the surface. I was intrigued
at first, then stunned by its gathering force and speed. It filled my head with
a nauseating, intolerable sense of hunger.
Hunger, thirst, appetite, craving...
It rose from the depths of the casket, wailing and yearning, a dark thing
tearing up through the other trace energies. I glimpsed its malice and felt its
consuming need.
Lowink broke the link. He slumped back in his seat, panting, his skin
dotted with the stigmatic blood-spots of an astropathic augury taken far too
far.
I felt it too. My mind seemed cold, colder even than the ministrations of
Dormant. It seemed to take a very long time before my thoughts began to
flow freely again, like water slowly thawing in an iced pipe.
I rose and poured myself a glass of amasec. I poured one for Lowink too
as an afterthought. Neither of us ever came away from an auto-séance
feeling good, but this was signally worse than usual.
‘There was danger,’ Lowink husked at last. ‘Vile danger. From the
casket.’
‘I felt it.’
‘But the whole séance was unseemly, master. As if distracted and spoiled
by some... some factor.’
I sighed. I knew what he had felt. ‘I can explain. The girl we have aboard
is an untouchable.’
Lowink shuddered. ‘Keep her away from me.’
I PASSED THE word ‘daesumnor’ to Aemos in case it assisted his work on
the data-slate and rested in my cabin to recover. Lowink had gone back to
his tiny residence under the cockpit deck. I doubted he would be useful for
much for a goodly while.
I gathered up the evidence items, re-bagged them and locked them in the
cutter’s strongbox, all except the casket, which was too big to fit. We kept it
bagged and chained in a tarpaulin locker aft. As I hefted it up to return it to
the locker, I felt the aftershock of its aura, as if we had woken something,
some instinct. I considered this to be the imagination of my stung mind
working overtime, but I completed the task only when I had buckled on a
pair of work gloves.
Betancore joined me shortly afterwards. He had gone through Vibben’s
effects and found no will or instructions. Now we needed her cabin to house
Fischig, so we placed her belongings and clothes in an underseat store bin
in the crew-bay and together carried her wrapped body to the cot in the
medical suite. I locked the door as we left.
‘What will you do with her?’ Betancore asked. ‘There’s no time to
arrange a burial here now.’
‘She once said she came with me to see what the stars were like. That’s
where we’ll lay her to rest.’
THEN I SLEPT, turning fitfully despite my exhaustion. When sleep finally
came, the dreams were cold and inhospitable. Murderously black, back-lit
clouds rippled in fast motion across skies I didn’t know, strobing with
electrical flashes. Dark trees, and darker, higher walls, ranged around the
edges of the dream. I felt the instinct, the hunger from the casket, lurking in
some blind spot my eyes refused to find.
Carrion birds, a flock of them, swooped down from the upper reaches of
the sky and took all the colour with them, staining the dream-world grey.
All except for a spot of red that glittered in the colourless soil ahead of me.
With each step I took towards it, it receded. I began to run. It continued
to display dream logic and moved away.
Finally, gasping for breath, I stopped running. The red spot had gone. I
felt the hunger again, but now it was inside me, clawing at my belly, filling
my throat with craving. The roiling clouds overhead froze suddenly,
motionless, even the lightning flares stilled and captured in jagged,
phosphorescent lines.
A voice spoke my name. I thought it was Vibben, but when I turned,
there was nothing to see except the suggestion of a presence drifting away
like smoke.
I woke. From the clock, I had been asleep only a couple of hours. My
throat was raw and my mouth dry. I drained two glasses of water from the
side cabinet and then fell back on the bed.
My head ached but my mind would not stop spinning. After that, no sleep
came at all.
THE VOX-LINK chimed about four hours later. It was Betancore. ‘The
Essene has just made orbit,’ he told me. ‘We can leave whenever you like.’
THE ESSENE LAY slantwise above the inverted bowl of Hubris, silhouetted
against the stars.
We had left the radiance of the Sun-dome into a blizzard squall. The
airframe of the cutter had vibrated wildly as Betancore lifted us out of the
clutches of the ferocious, icy winds until we were riding clear over an ocean
of frosty vapour.
The blizzard, a sculptural white continent, then dropped away below until
we could see its tides and gusts and currents, the wide centrifugal patterns
of its titanic force.
‘There,’ Betancore had said, with a nod to the raked front ports. Even at
ninety kilometres, still rising through the thinning aeropause, he had made
visual contact.
It had taken me a few more moments to find it. A bar of darkness
distorting the pearly edge of the planesphere.
Another minute, and it had become a three-dimensional solid. A minute
more, and I began to resolve the running lights glittering on its surface.
Yet another minute and it filled the ports. It resembled some colossal
tower that had been ripped away from its earthly foundations and set adrift,
tranquil, in the void.
‘A beauty,’ murmured Betancore, who appreciated such things. His inlaid
hands flicked over the flight controls and we yawed to the correct approach
vectors. The gun-cutter and the massive vessel exchanged automatic
telemetry chatter. The flight deck pict-plates were alive with columns of
rushing data.
‘A bulk clipper, of the classic Isolde pattern, from the depot yards of Ur-
Haven or Tancred. Majestic...’ Aemos was muttering and annotating his idle
observations into his wrist slate again.
The Essene was three kilometres long by my estimation, and fully seven
hundred metres deep at its broadest part. Its nose was a long sleek cone like
a cathedral spire made of overlapping gothic curves and barbed with bronze
finials and spines. Behind that bladed front, the angular hull thickened into
muscular buttresses of rusty-red plating, looped and riveted with ribs of
dark steel. Crenellated tower stacks bulged from the dorsal hump. Hundred
metre masts stabbed forward from the hull like tusks and other, shorter
masts projected from the flanks and underside, winking with guide lights.
The rear portion of the juggernaut splayed into four heat-blackened cones,
each of which was large enough to swallow a dozen gun-cutters at once.
Betancore turned us in and ran us along the flank heading aft. To us, the
great vessel seemed to wallow and roll as we joined its horizontal.
A lighted dot divorced itself from the Essene and ran out ahead of us,
flashing ultra-bright patterns of red and green lamps: a pilot drone to lead us
in.
Betancore gently chased the drone and swung to port as its lights
instructed. We slid neatly between two mast arrays, crossed the ribbed belly,
and finally braked to station-keeping under a rectangular belly-hatch edged
with black and yellow chevrons. The hatch was one of a line of six down
the hull’s underside, but this was the only open one. A fiery orange glow
washed down over us.
Exchanging a few terse comments with Uclid in the drive room,
Betancore nudged the gun-cutter upwards through the yawning hatch. I
watched the edges of the hatch-mouth, two metres thick and scratched in
places to the bare metal, pass by alarmingly close.
There followed a series of gentle shudders, and mechanical thumps
against the cutter’s outer hull. Amber light bathed the cockpit. I looked up
into the glow outside, but saw little except a suggestion of dark gantries and
cargo-lifting derricks.
Another shudder. Betancore threw a row of switches and there was a
whine as power-feeds and autosystems wound down. He pushed back from
the control deck, and began pulling on his hide gloves.
He smiled at me. ‘You needn’t look so worried,’ he mocked.
IN TRUTH, I am most disquieted by things I have no control over. Though
I have rudimentary skills, and can manage an atmospheric craft, I am no
pilot, certainly not one with Midas’s Glavian pedigree. That’s why I employ
him and that’s why he makes it look so easy. But sometimes my face
betrays the alarm I feel in situations where I have no ability.
Besides, I was tired. But I knew sleep wouldn’t come even if I tried, and
there was business to attend to anyway.
Aemos, Bequin and Lowink would stay on the cutter for now. As soon as
the hull door was closed and atmosphere recirculated into the Essene’s hold,
I opened the hatch and stepped out with Fischig and Betancore.
The hold where we were docked was vaulted and immense. I reminded
myself it was just one of six accommodated by this vessel. The surfaces of
the walls and decking were oily black, and sodium lighting arrays bolted to
the ceiling filled the place with orange tinted luminescence. The spaces
above us were busy with the skeletal shapes of cranes and monotask lifters,
all shut down and lifeless. Packing materials littered the open floor. The
gun-cutter was held over the sealed floor hatch in a greased crib of docking
pistons and hydraulic clamps.
We crossed the hold, boots ringing on the metal deck-plates. It was cold,
the chill of open space still lingering.
Betancore wore his usual Glavian pilot suit and garish jacket. He was
cheerful and whistled tunelessly. Fischig was impassive, oozing command
in his brown Arbites uniform. He had fixed his golden sun-disk of office to
the breast of his jacket.
I wore a dark sober suit of grey wool, black boots and gloves and a long
navy-blue leather coat with a high collar. I had taken a stub-pistol from the
weapons locker and had it in a holster rig under my left arm. My
inquisitorial rosette was buttoned away inside a pocket. Unlike Fischig, I
felt no need to make a statement of authority.
A hatch clanked open on servos, and light shone out from an internal
companionway. A figure stepped out to meet us.
‘Welcome to the Essene, inquisitor,’ said Tobias Maxilla.
SEVEN
With the master of the Essene.
A farewell.
Scrutiny.
Maxilla was a veteran trader who had run the Essene down the lanes
from Thracian Primaris to the Grand Banks for fifty years. He told me he’d
dealt in bulk consumables at the start of his career, then begun to specialise
in exotic goods when the big bonded guilds began to dominate the
wholesale market.
‘The Essene’s got speed, a sprint trader. Pays me better to carry luxury
cargoes and deliver them express, even if I don’t run at capacity.’
‘You run this route regularly?’
‘For the past few decades. It’s seasonal. Sameter, Hesperus, Thracian,
Hubris, Gudrun, sometimes to Messina too. When Dormant finishes on
Hubris, there’ll be a lot more work there.’
We sat in the luxurious surroundings of his audience suite, sipping
vintage amasec from large crystal glasses. Maxilla was showing off, but
that was acceptable. He had a ship and a reputation to be proud of.
‘So you know these routes well?’ Fischig put in.
Maxilla smiled. He was a sinewy man of indeterminate age, dressed in a
full-skirted coat of red velvet with wide button-back cuffs and an
extravagant black lace cravat. His smile showed teeth that were inlaid with
mother of pearl. Ostentation was common among ship’s masters, it was part
of showing off. Forget family lineage and noble blood, one had told me
once, the lineage and pedigree of starships is where the new Imperial
nobility is to be found. Ship’s masters were the real Imperial aristocracy.
So Maxilla seemed to think, anyway. His face was powdered with white
skin-dye, and he wore a sapphire as a beauty spot on his cheek. His
imposing two-horned wig was spun from silver-thread. Heavy signet rings
clinked against his balloon glass as he lifted it.
‘Yes, chastener, I know them well.’
‘I don’t think we need to start interrogating Master Maxilla yet, Fischig,’
I said plainly. Betancore snorted and Maxilla chuckled. Fischig glowered
into his amasec.
A servitor, its torso and head casing wrought to resemble an antique
ship’s figurehead, a full-breasted damsel with gilt snakes in her hair,
hummed across the expensive Selgioni rug and offered us trays of
delicacies. I took one out of politeness. It was a sliver of perfect ketelfish,
exquisitely sautéed and wrapped in a nearly transparent leaf of pastry.
Betancore helped himself to several.
‘You’re a Glavian?’ Maxilla asked Betancore. The two promptly fell to
discussing the merits of the famous Glavian longprow. I lost interest and
looked around the suite. Amid the finery were a series of priceless portraits
from the Sameter School, marble busts of planetary rulers, a Jokaero light-
sculpture, antique weapons and mounted suits of ceremonial mirror armour
from Vitria. Aemos would appreciate this, I thought. It was to be a journey
of more than a week. I’d make sure he got a chance to see it.
‘Do you know Gudrun?’ Maxilla was asking me.
I shook my head. ‘This will be my first visit. I have only been in this sub-
sector a year or so.’
‘A fine place, though you’ll find it busy. There’s a month-long festival
under way to celebrate the founding of a new guard regiment. If you have
the time, I recommend the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts, and the guild
museums in Dorsay.’
‘I may be a little occupied.’
He shrugged. ‘I always make the time to do more than simply work,
inquisitor. But I know your calling is rather more strenuous than mine.’
I tried to get the measure of him, but I was failing so far. He had agreed
to give us passage, and for a modest fee considering what he might have
demanded. I had already paid him with an Imperial bond. Most ship masters
don’t like to turn down a request from an inquisitor, even if they are
charging. Was it just that Maxilla wanted to keep sweet with the Ordos? Or
was he simply a generous man?
Or did he have something to hide?
I wondered. Truthfully, I didn’t care. The other possibility was he might
think this entitled him to some future favour.
If he did, he would be wrong.
THE ESSENE LEFT Hubris later that day, executed the translation to the
Empyrean effortlessly, and made best speed for Gudrun. Maxilla provided
quarters for us all in his state apartments, but we spent most of our time on
the cutter, working. Betancore and the servitors ran an overhaul of the ship.
Lowink slept. Fischig, Aemos and I worked through the paperwork on the
evidence, and threw conjectures back and forth. I still held back what little I
knew of the Pontius from Fischig, but it wouldn’t be long before he started
to make the connection himself.
Bequin kept herself to herself. She’d borrowed a set of fatigues from a
work locker and I saw her about the ship, reading books she’d taken from
my personal library. Poetry, mostly, and some historical and philosophical
works. I didn’t mind. It kept her out of my way.
ON THE THIRD day of the voyage, I met Maxilla again, and we walked the
upper promenade deck together. He seemed to enjoy telling me the histories
and provenances of the ormolu-framed paintings displayed there. We saw
the occasional servitor at work, but so far there had not been the slightest
glimpse of any other living crewperson.
‘Your friend, Fischig... he is an unsubtle man,’ he remarked at length.
‘He’s no friend. And yes, he is unsubtle. Has he been asking you
questions again?’
‘I saw him briefly on the foredecks yesterday. He asked me if I knew a
man called Eyclone. Even showed me a picture.’
‘And what did you say?’
He flashed his pearly teeth at me. ‘Now who’s interrogating?’
‘Forgive my imprudence.’
He waved a lace-cuffed hand. ‘Oh, forget it! Ask anyway! Get your
questions out into the open so we can clear the air!’
‘Very well. What did you tell him?’
‘That I did not.’
I nodded. ‘Thank you for your candour.’
‘But I was lying.’
I turned and looked at Maxilla sharply. He was still smiling. I had the
sudden horrible notion that we had all walked into a trap and dearly wished
I was carrying a weapon.
‘Don’t worry. I lied to him because he’s an arrogant runt. But I’ll give
you the truth of it. I would never want to put myself in the path of an
Imperial Inquisition.’
‘A wise philosophy.’
Maxilla flopped down on a satin couch and smoothed the front of his
coat. ‘I was last on Thracian Primaris two months ago. There was talk of
some cargo and I held some meetings. The usual. And that’s when this
Eyclone enters the frame. Didn’t call himself that, of course. Bless me, I
forget the name he used. But it was him. Had others with him, a sour, tight
lot. One called Crotes, a trade envoy. He tried to have me believe your man
was authorised by the Guild Sinesias, but that was rubbish, even though
Crotes had the paperwork.’
‘What did he want?’
‘He was hiring to make a run, empty, to Gudrun, collect a cargo there,
and bring it to Hubris.’
‘The nature of the cargo?’
‘We never got that far. I turned him down. It was preposterous. He was
offering a decent fee, but I knew I’d make ten times that with my regular
work.’
‘You didn’t get a contact name on Gudrun either?’
‘My dear inquisitor, I’m just a shipman, not a detective.’
‘Do you know who finally took his work?’
‘I know who didn’t.’ He sat forward. ‘I happen to keep up dialogues with
other masters. Seems several of us turned it down, and most for the same
reason.’
‘Which was?’
‘It felt like trouble.’
BY THE FIFTH day, my sleep patterns had begun to return to normal. Too
normal, in fact, as Eyclone began to stalk my dreams again. In sleep, he
came to me, taunting and threatening. I don’t remember much detail, except
the afterimage of his grinning face each time I woke.
In hindsight, though Eyclone was certainly in my dreams, I don’t think it
was his smiling face I was remembering.
THE ESSENE TRANSLATED back into real-space and entered the Gudrun
system on the morning of the eighth day, ahead of schedule. Maxilla had
boasted his ship was fast under optimum conditions and the boast hadn’t
been empty.
I had made arrangements with him to leave the Empyrean in the outreach
of the system, considerably short of the busy local trade lanes that most
arrivals to Gudrun followed. He agreed without question. It would only be a
short delay.
‘Who was she?’ Bequin asked me as we stood at an observation bay
watching the pale shape of Vibben’s shrouded body slowly turn end over
end as it drifted away from the Essene.
‘A friend. A comrade,’ I replied.
‘Is this how she wanted to go?’ she asked.
‘I don’t think she wanted to go at all,’ I said. Nearby, Aemos and
Betancore gazed gravely out of the thick port. Aemos’s expression was
unreadable. Betancore’s dark face was drawn and anguished.
Lowink hadn’t joined us, and neither had Fischig. But as I turned, I saw
Maxilla standing respectfully at the rear of the observation bay, wearing a
long mourning coat of black silk and a short periwig with black ribbons. He
moved forward as he saw me look.
‘I hope I’m not intruding. My respects to your lost comrade.’
I nodded my thanks. He hadn’t needed to make this effort, but it seemed
appropriate for the ship’s master to be present during a void burial.
‘I’m not sure how these things are formally conducted, Maxilla,’ I said,
‘though I think this is what she would have asked for. I have spoken the
Imperial Creed, and the Oration of the Dead.’
‘Then you have done her fine service. If it is appropriate...?’
He waved forward one of his gold-plated figurehead servitors, which
carried a salver of glasses and a decanter. ‘It is tradition to drink a toast to
the departed,’ We all took a glass. ‘Lores Vibben,’ I said.
A MINUTE OR so’s silence followed, then we slowly dispersed. I told
Maxilla we could begin our approach run to Gudrun now, and he estimated
it would take two hours to reach the inner system.
Returning to the cutter, I found myself walking with Bequin. She still
wore the old work-suit she had liberated, though somehow it seemed to
enhance her beauty rather than stifle it.
‘We’re almost there,’ she said.
‘Indeed.’
‘What will my duties be?’
I had yet to explain to her what she was or why I had recruited her. There
had been ample time en route, but I had been putting it off, I suppose. I’d
found time to show Aemos the finery of Maxilla’s state rooms, and play
regicide with Betancore. I wished I could throw off my distaste at just
simply being around her.
I walked with her to the promenade deck and began to explain.
I don’t know how I expected her to take it. When she took it badly and
became upset, my response was barely controlled irritation. I knew it was
her nature that was making me react this way and fought to find the
sympathy she deserved.
She sat weeping on a shot-silk chair beneath one of the massive
paintings; a hunting scene of nobles riding thoroughbred ursadons in the
chase. Every now and then, she would blurt out a curse or whine a regret.
It was clear she wasn’t upset that I wanted to employ her. It was simply
the fundamental knowledge that she was... abnormal. A friendless, loveless
life of woes and hard knocks suddenly had an explanation and that
explanation was her own nature. I believe that she had always, stoically,
blamed the galaxy as a whole for her troubles. Now I’d as good as kicked
that emotional crutch away.
I damned myself for not thinking the consequences through. I’d robbed
her of self-esteem and what little confidence she could muster. I’d shown up
her lifelong efforts to find comfort, love and respect as hollow, self-
destructive, self-denying futility.
I tried to talk about the work she could do for me. She wasn’t much
interested. In the end, I pulled up another chair and sat next to her as she
worked the painful truth through her mind.
I was still sitting there when I received a vox-signal. It was Maxilla.
‘I wonder if you could join me on the bridge, inquisitor? I require your
assistance.’
THE BRIDGE OF the Essene was a wide domed chamber with floors and
pillars of red-black marble. Silver servitors, immaculate and intricate as
sculptures, were stationed at console positions sunk into the floor, their
delicate geared arms working banks of controls set into polished mahogany
fascias. The air was cool and still, and the only sound was the gentle hum
and whirr of the working machines.
Maxilla, still dressed in his mourning robes, sat in a massive leather
throne overlooking the room from a marble dais. Articulated limbs
extending from the rear of the throne suspended pict-plates and consoles in
his reach, but his attention was on the massive main observation port that
dominated the front of the bridge.
I strode across the floor from the entrance. Each servitor wore a mask of
chased gold, fashioned into a human face of classical perfection.
‘Inquisitor,’ Maxilla said, rising.
‘Your crew are all servitors,’ I remarked.
‘Yes,’ he said distractedly. ‘They are more reliable than pure flesh.’
I made no other comment. Maxilla’s relationship with the Essene seemed
to me akin to the way the Adeptus Mechanicus worship their god-machines.
Constant involvement with such ancient instruments had convinced them of
the natural inferiority of the human species.
I followed his gaze and looked at the main port. The gleaming sphere of
Gudrun lay ahead, a creamy swirl of clouds stained with the lime-green
phantoms of great forests under the climate cover. Clusters of black shapes
thickly dotted the space between us and the planet. These were huge groups
of orbiting ships, I realised. Massive dreadnoughts at high anchor, trains of
great merchant ships, convoys of trade freighters streaming in under tug
supervision. I had seldom seen such a wealth of orbital activity.
‘Is there a problem?’ I asked him.
He looked over at me, something like anxiety in his eyes. ‘I have
performed legal manoeuvres and entered the trade lane approach. Gudrun
control has allocated me a high-anchor buoy. All relevant data is in order
and my tariffs are paid. But I have just been informed that we are to be
boarded and inspected.’
‘This is unusual?’
‘It’s been ten years since anyone even suggested such a thing of my
ship.’
‘Explanation?’
‘They say security. I told you there was a founding festival under way.
You can see considerable portions of Battlefleet Scarus on station. I think
the military is being over-careful of its interests here just now.’
‘You mentioned my assistance.’
‘The inspection launch is on its way. I feel it would facilitate matters if
they were met by a ship’s master and an Imperial inquisitor.’
‘I can’t pull strings, Maxilla.’
He laughed humourlessly and looked me in the eye. ‘Of course you can!
But that’s not what I’m asking. With an inquisitor present, they will treat
the Essene with more respect. I’ll not have them root through this vessel
mindlessly.’
I thought for a moment. This smacked of the favour I had a feeling he
might call in. Worse, it stank of impropriety on his part.
‘I’ll agree to be present for the sake of order, provided you can assure me
you have nothing to hide.’
‘Inquisitor Eisenhorn, I—’
‘Save your indignation for the inspection, Maxilla. Your assurance is all I
require. If I assist you only to find you have some dirty secret or illicit
cargo, you will have a great deal more to worry about than the Imperial
Navy.’
There was a look of great disappointment on his face. Either he was a
superb actor, or I had truly wounded his feelings.
‘I have nothing to hide,’ he hissed. ‘I fancied you and I had become... if
not friends then decent acquaintances at least this voyage. I have shown you
hospitality and freely given information into your confidence. I am hurt that
you still suspect me.’
‘Suspicion is my business, Maxilla. If I have wronged you, my
apologies.’
‘Nothing to hide!’ he repeated, almost to himself, and led me off the
bridge.
A NAVY PINNACE, matt-grey and deep hulled, drew alongside the massive
Essene and clamped itself to the fore starboard airgate. Maxilla and I were
there to meet it, along with Fischig and two of the ship’s primary servitors,
spectacular creations of gold and silver machine parts.
I’d summoned Fischig on the basis that if the sight of an inquisitor would
help, then an Arbites chastener would do no harm either. Betancore was
instructed to keep everyone else with the cutter.
The gate-locks cycled open and the hatch jaws gaped, exhaling torrents
of steam. A dozen large figures emerged through the haze. They were all
dressed in the grey and black body armour of naval security, with the crest
and sector-symbol of Battlefleet Scarus displayed on their chests and gold
braid edging their epaulettes. All were masked in form-moulded ceramite
helmets with lowered visor plates and rebreathers. They were armed with
compact, short-frame autoguns.
The leader stepped forward and his men grouped behind him. They didn’t
form a neat echelon. Messy, I thought, casual, lacking the usual drilled
discipline of the infamous naval security arm. These men were bored and
going through the motions. They wanted this formality over and done too.
‘Tobias Maxilla?’ barked the leader, his voice distorted by his mask and
vox-amplified.
‘I am Maxilla,’ said the ship’s master, stepping forward.
‘You have been notified that an inspection of your vessel is due. Furnish
me with crew lists and cargo manifests. Your full co-operation is expected.’
At a nod from Maxilla, one of the servitors moved forward on silent
tracks and handed the security detail’s leader a data-slate with the relevant
material.
He didn’t look at it. ‘Do you have anything you wish to volunteer before
the inspection begins? It will go easier for you if you make submissions of
contraband.’
I watched the exchange. There were twelve troops, hardly enough to
search a ship the size of the Essene. Where were their servitors, their
scanning units, their crow-bars, multi-keys and heat-detectors?
They had no way of knowing who I was from my appearance, but why
had they not remarked on the presence of an Arbites?
My vox channel was set to the cutter’s. I didn’t speak, but I keyed it three
times. A non-verbal part of Glossia Betancore would understand.
‘You haven’t yet identified yourself,’ I said.
The lead security trooper turned to look at me. I saw only my reflection
in his tint-coated visor.
‘What?’
‘You haven’t identified yourself or shown your warrant of practice. It is a
requirement of such inspections.’
‘We’re naval security—’ he began angrily, stepping towards me. His men
faltered.
‘You could be anybody.’ I pulled out my Inquisitorial Rosette. ‘I am
Gregor Eisenhorn, Imperial inquisitor. We will do this correctly or not at
all.’
‘You’re Eisenhorn?’ he said.
There was no surprise in his voice at all. A tiny thing to notice but
enough for me.
The warning was already rising in my throat as their guns came up.
EIGHT
A dozen killers.
The procurator.
Grain merchants from Hesperus.
MAXILLA UTTERED A yell of disbelief. The leader of the security detail
and two of his men opened fire.
Their compact autoguns were designed for ship-board fighting and zero-
gravity work: low velocity, low recoil weapons that fired blunt-nosed slugs
which couldn’t puncture a hull.
But they were more than capable of shredding a man.
I threw myself sideways as the first shots spanged off the deck or left
ugly metal bruises on the wall. In seconds, it was utter chaos. All the
security troopers were firing, some on semi-automatic. Smoke filled the air
and the airgate chamber was shaking with muzzle flashes and gunfire.
One of Maxilla’s servitors was decapitated and then punched into spare-
part debris as it turned towards the attackers. The other tried to move to
shield Maxilla, but more shots tore out its tracks and its torso.
Two shots ripped through my trailing coat, but I made it to the doorframe
behind us. I yanked my stub-pistol from its holster.
Fischig had drawn his own sidearm and was blasting away as he backed
towards the door. He dropped one of the troopers with a tight group of shots
that sent the man flying in a puff of blood. Then Fischig was lifted off his
feet by a hit to the stomach. Doubled over, he tumbled into the corner of the
chamber and lay still.
Maxilla roared and raised his right hand. A beam of searing light spat
from one of the ornate rings and the nearest trooper exploded, burned down
to scorched bone and ragged armour in his midsection. As the smouldering
ruin crashed to the deck plates, the man behind him caught Maxilla in a
chasing arc of automatic fire and blasted him backwards through the glass
doors of an evacsuit-bay.
The rest were charging my position. I braced and fired, placing a shot
that shattered the visor of the first approaching security trooper. He fell on
his face.
The stub-pistol, designed for concealment, had a four-shot clip and I had
a spare magazine in my coat pocket. Seven shots remained and there were
still nine of them.
At least the stubber had stopping power. The clips only held four shells
because they were high-calibre solids, each the size of my thumb. The
short, fat muzzle of my stubber barked again and another trooper spun
sideways.
I backed down the corridor, hugging the wall. The access-way to the air-
gate was a wide, cable-lined passage, octagonal in cross-section and lit only
by deck lights. The troopers’ slow, buzzing shots hissed down the hallway
at me. I fired back again, but missed my target. A salvo of rounds blew out
a power relay on the wall nearby in a shower of sparks. I ducked away into
shadows, and found the latch-handle of a shutter in the small of my back.
I turned, pulled it free and threw myself through it as a blizzard of shots
impacted along the access-way wall.
On the other side of the shutter, I found a narrow inspection tunnel for the
airgate’s main docking mechanisms. The floor was metal grille, and the
tight walls were thick with networks of cables and plumper hydraulic hoses.
At the end, a bare metal ladder dropped down through a floor-well or up
into an inspection shaft.
There was no time to climb either way. The first trooper was pushing
through the shutter and raising his weapon. I shot down the length of the
tunnel and blew out his chest-plate, and then jumped off the grille into the
ladder well.
Five metres down, I slammed into a cage-platform. There was only red
auxiliary light down here. The troopers’ visors had vision amplifiers.
I was down in the guts of the vast docking clamp now, crawling between
huge greased pistons and hydraulic rams the size of mature bluewood firs.
Gases vented and lubricant fluids drizzled amid dangling loops of chain.
The throb of heavy-duty compressors and atmosphere regulators filled the
air.
I got into cover. All four red tell-tale lights on the stubber’s grip were
showing. I ejected the disposable plastic clip and slid the fresh one into
place. Four green lights lit up in place of the red ones.
There was noise from the ladder-well. Two bulky dark shapes were
moving down, backlit by the light from above.
Their visors had heat-enhancement too. That was clear the moment they
both started firing at my position. I buried myself behind a piston unit but a
round ricocheted off the oily metal and slammed into my right shoulder,
driving me forward against the deck. My face hit the grille, and it reopened
the gash in my cheek, popping out several of the butterfly clips that were
just beginning to get the torn flesh to knit back together.
More shots rattled off the scant metal cover. Another ricochet hit the toe
of my boot, and another punched into my arm, smashing my hand back
against the wall behind me.
The impact kicked the stubber from my grip. It bounced away across the
floor, just out of reach, the four green lights taunting me.
There were at least three of them out there now, moving through the
confined space between machinery, firing bursts my way. I crawled on
hands and knees along behind a horizontal clamp piston, low-velocity
rounds pinking off the wall behind and above me.
I thought about using the will, but I had no chance of getting line of sight
to try any sophisticated mind trick.
At the back end of the massive clamp, I found cover by the arrestor
baffles and giant kinetic dampers that soften the impact of another ship
against the docking arms. Greenish light filtered from a small control panel
mounted in the wall between the dampers. The panel had a toughened
plastic hood over it like a public vox-booth, and a glance showed me it was
a test-reset terminal for docking array maintenance. I tried punching several
icons, but the small, oval plate displayed the message Terminal locked out.
Automatic safety measures were in place because a ship – the naval security
troopers’ pinnace – was in the docking clamp, mated to the airgate on the
deck above.
I could hear scrambling above the ambient noise. The first of the troopers
was clambering down the side of the clamp, following my route back to the
dampers.
I took out my inquisitorial rosette. It is a badge of office and a great deal
more besides. A press of my thumb deployed the micro multi-key from its
recess, and I slid it into the terminal’s socket. It engaged. The screen
blanked. My rosette had up to magenta level Imperial clearance. I prayed
Maxilla had not encoded his entire ship with personal encryptions.
The screen flashed again. I tapped a release order into the terminal.
‘Dock array in active use,’ it told me in blunt green letters.
I hit override.
With a tumultuous grinding, the docking clamp disengaged. Dampers
roared. Steam vented explosively. Alarms started wailing.
There was an agonised scream as the trooper on my heels was gripped
and then crashed from the waist down by ten tonnes of expanding piston-
sleeve.
From the deck far above, there were explosive bangs and the shriek of
shearing metal. I could barely hear them above the mechanical din in the
clamp chamber.
When the sighing and hissing of the massive pistons died away and the
venting gases reduced to a sporadic gasp, I clambered up from behind the
dampers. The entire architecture of the chamber had altered as the massive
docking engines had switched from active to disengaged. Two troopers had
been crashed by the heavy gear, another lay dead under a steam vent,
braised in his armour by a rush of superheated steam.
I took up a fallen naval-issue autogun and retraced my steps.
BY MY COUNT, there were still four loose and active. I came back along
the inspection tunnel and re-entered the access-way. Warning lights strobed
all along the passage and muted alarms still sounded. A figure suddenly
appeared to my left. I wheeled around. It was Betancore. He was looking
straight past me, one of his elegant needle pistols aimed straight at me. He
fired it twice.
A distinctive stinging buzz resounded loud in my ears – and a security
trooper at the far end of the passage staggered out of cover. Another shot
and the man slammed over, feet out from under him.
‘Came as soon as you gave the signal,’ said Betancore.
‘What’s your tally?’
‘Four, so far.’
‘Then we’re probably done. But stay sharp.’ I smiled at myself. Telling
Midas Betancore to stay sharp was like telling a dog to stay hairy.
‘You’re a mess,’ he told me. ‘What the hell happened?’
Blood ran down the side of my face from the reopened gash, I was
moving awkwardly from the glancing hits to my shoulder and arm, and I
was thoroughly smirched in machine oil from the docking mechanism.
‘This wasn’t an inspection. They were looking for me.’
‘Naval security?’
‘I don’t think so. They lacked precision and didn’t know procedure.’
‘But they had kit, weapons – a Navy pinnace, Emperor damn them!’
‘That’s what worries me.’
WE WENT BACK to the airgate. An emergency shutter had come down to
seal the breach when my makeshift undocking had torn the pinnace off the
side of the Essene. Through side ports, I could see its grey hull skewed
alongside us, still attached to the clamps by one of its own docking
extensors, though that was badly twisted. Its integral airgate had blown on
disconnection and at least the passenger section was open to hard vacuum.
If the crew had survived, they would be in the foresection, though probably
helpless. Glittering debris, scraps of metal plating and sheared sections of
extensor hung in the void outside.
I checked Fischig. He was alive. His Arbites uniform was heavily laced
with armour, but the short-range impacts had given him internal injuries; he
was unconscious and leaking blood from the mouth.
Betancore found Maxilla beyond the shattered glass doors of the
evacsuit-bay. He had crawled across the floor and propped himself against a
harness rack. From the chest down, his rich clothes were shredded and his
legs were gone.
But then, from the chest down, he wasn’t human.
‘So my... bare facts are revealed to you after all, inquisitor...’ he said,
managing a smile. I imagined he was in pain, or shock at least. To control
the sophisticated bionic lower body he had to have intricate neural linkage.
‘What can I do to help you, Tobias?’
He shook his head. ‘I have summoned servitors to assist me. I’ll be back
on my feet soon enough.’
There were many questions I wanted to ask him. Was his reconstruction
the result of old injury, disease, age? Or was it, as I had a feeling,
voluntary? I kept the questions to myself. They were private and didn’t
concern my investigation.
‘I need access to your astropathic link. I need to contact battlefleet
command and speed the closure of this matter. These men weren’t a naval
security detail.’
‘I’ll instruct the bridge to provide you with the access you need. You may
care to extract the inspection requests from my communication log.’
That would help. I didn’t think the high commanders of Battlefleet
Scarus would take this lying down.
I WAS HALF-RIGHT, but only half. Within half an hour I was on the bridge
of the Essene, surrounded by attentive servitors, reporting the incident to
battlefleet command by confidential astropathic link. Before long, I was in
vox dialogue with aides from the staff office of Admiral Lorpal Spatian,
who requested that I secure the Essene at its high-anchor buoy and await the
arrival of a security detail and an envoy from the battlefleet procurator.
The idea of sitting tight and waiting for more troopers to arrive didn’t
especially appeal.
‘DESERTERS, SIR,’ PROCURATOR Olm Madorthene told me, two hours later.
He was a grizzled, narrow man with cropped grey hair and an old augmetic
implant down the side of his neck under his left ear. He wore the starched
white, high collared jacket, red gloves, pressed black jodhpurs and high
patent leather boots of the Battlefleet Disciplinary Detachment. Madorthene
had been courteous from the moment he came aboard, saluting me and
tucking his gold-braided white crowned cap under his arm respectfully. His
detachment of troopers were dressed and equipped identically to the ones
that had boarded the Essene to kill us, but from the moment of their arrival I
noted their greater discipline and tight order.
‘Deserters?’
Madorthene seemed uneasy. He clearly disliked entanglements with an
inquisitor.
‘From the guard levies. You are aware a founding is presently under way
on Gudrun. By order of the Lord Militant Commander, seven hundred and
fifty thousand men are being inducted into the Imperial Guard to form the
50th Gudrunite Rifles. Such is the size of the founding, and the fact that this
is notably the fiftieth regiment assembled from this illustrious world, that a
planet-wide celebration and associated ceremonial military events are
taking place.’
‘And these men deserted?’
Madorthene delicately drew me to one side as his troopers carried the
corpses of the insurgents from the vicinity of the airgate and bagged them. I
had set Betancore to watch over them.
‘We have had trouble,’ he confided quietly. ‘The muster was originally to
have been half a million, but the Lord Militant Commander increased the
figure a week prior to the founding – he is preparing for a crusade into the
Ophidian sub-sector – and, well, many found themselves conscripted with
little notice. Between you and me, the great festivities are partly an attempt
to draw attention from the matter. There’s been some rioting in barracks at
the founding area, and desertion. It’s been busy for us.’
‘I can well imagine. You know for certain these men are deserters from
the guard?’
He nodded and handed me a data-slate. On it was a list of twelve names,
linked to file biographies and blurry holo portraits.
‘They absconded from Founding Barrack 74 outside Dorsay yesterday,
took uniforms and weapons from the bursary at the orbital port and stole a
pinnace. No one thought to challenge a squad of naval security troopers.’
‘And no one questioned their lack of credentials and flight codes?’
‘Regrettably, the pinnace had been pre-loaded with a course plan and
transponder codes to take it into the fleet anchorage. They would have been
discovered long since had that not been the case. They were clearly looking
for a non-military starship like this.’
‘These are regular draftees? Infantrymen?’
‘Yes.’
‘Who could fly a pinnace?’
‘The ringleader,’ he referred back to the slate, ‘one Jonno Lingaart, was a
qualified orbital pilot. Worked on the ferries. As I said, a regrettable
combination of events.’
I wasn’t going to let this go. Madorthene wasn’t lying, I was certain of
that. But the information he was presenting me with was full of gaps and
inconsistencies.
‘What about the demand for the inspection?’
‘That came from the pinnace itself. Entirely unofficial. They spotted your
ship and improvised. We have sourced the inspection demand to the
pinnace’s vox-log.’
‘No,’ I said. He took a step backwards, alert to the anger that was
growing in me.
‘Sir?’
‘I have checked the Essene’s communication log. It doesn’t tell me the
origin of the signals, but it shows the inspection demand came via
astropathic link, not vox. The pinnace had no astropath.’
‘That’s—’
‘This is the same astropathic link that allocated the Essene its high-
anchor buoy. That’s been shown as authentic enough. And these men were
looking for me. Me, procurator. To kill me. They knew my name.’
He went pale and seemed unable to find a reply.
I turned away from him. ‘I don’t know who these men are – they may
indeed have been guard draftees. But someone set them on this course to
find me, someone who covered their movements, provided materials and
transport, and authenticated their business with this ship. Someone either in
the battlefleet or with an outrageous amount of access to its workings. No
other explanation fits.’
‘You’re talking of... a conspiracy.’
‘I am no stranger to underhand behaviour, Madorthene. Nor am I unduly
perturbed by attempts on my life. I have enemies. I expect such things. This
shows me my enemies are even more powerful than I suspected.’
‘My lord, I—’
‘What is your level of seniority, procurator?’
‘I am grade one, magenta cleared, enjoying equivalency with the rank of
fleet commodore. I answer directly to Lord Procurator Humbolt.’ I knew
this from his shoulder flashes, but I wanted to hear him tell me.
‘Of course. Your superior wouldn’t have trusted such a delicate matter to
a junior officer. Nor did he want to show disrespect to me. I trust this matter
is still held in the highest confidence?’
‘Sir, yes sir! The lord procurator recognised its... delicacy. Besides,
notices of any infractions are being suppressed by order of the Lord
Militant Commander, so as not to foment further unrest. The details of this
incident are known only to myself and my squad here, the lord procurator
and his senior aides.’
‘Then I’d like to keep it that way. I’d like my enemies to believe, for as
long as possible, that this assassination attempt was successful. Can I rely
on your co-operation, prosecutor?’
‘Of course, inquisitor.’
‘You will take an encrypted message back to your lord procurator from
me. It will appraise him of the situation and my requirements. I will also
supply you with a covert vox-link with which to contact me if any further
information becomes available. Any further information, Madorthene, even
if you don’t believe I will find it relevant.’
He nodded keenly again. I didn’t add the codicil that if I found this
confidence broken I would come after him, the senior aides and the lord
procurator himself like the wrath of Rogal Dorn. He could figure that out
for himself.
AFTER MADORTHENE AND his crew had left the Essene, I turned to
Betancore. ‘What now?’ he asked. ‘How does it feel to be dead, Midas?’
WE LEFT THE Essene at midnight aboard the gun-cutter. Fischig,
conscious now, remained aboard Maxilla’s ship, recovering from his
punishing wounds in the Essene’s spectacularly equipped auto-infirmary.
Maxilla had agreed to keep the Essene at anchor for the time being. I had
arranged to cover all revenues he stood to lose. I felt I might need a reliable
ship at a moment’s notice, and it also made sense that if the Essene
suddenly departed, it would weaken the cover-story that we were all dead.
I talked it over with Maxilla in the bridge chamber. He sat in his great
throne, sipping amasec while reconstruction servitors painstakingly
restructured his lower limbs.
‘I’m sorry you are now so involved, Tobias.’
‘I’m not,’ he said. ‘This has been the most interesting run I’ve made in a
long time.’
‘You’re prepared to stay until I give you word?’
‘You’re paying well, inquisitor!’ he laughed at this. ‘In truth, I am
content to help you serve the Emperor. Besides, that oaf Fischig needs
better care than your cutter’s dingy medical suite can provide, and I can
assure you I won’t be running off anywhere until he’s safely off my ship.’
I LEFT THE bridge, almost charmed by Maxilla’s generous spirit. There
could be many reasons why he assisted me so willingly – fear of the
Inquisition being the chief one – but in truth, I was certain it was because he
had rediscovered the pleasure of interaction with other humans. It was there
in his eagerness to talk, to show off his art treasures, to help, to
accommodate... He had been alone in the company of machines for too
long.
BETANCORE CHANGED THE transponder codes of the gun-cutter as we left
the Essene’s hold. We kept a number of alternative craft identifiers in the
codifier memory. For the past few months, and during the stop-over at
Hubris, we had run as an official transport of the Inquisition, making no
attempt to hide our nature.
Now we were a trade delegation from Sameter, specialising in gene-fixed
cereal crops, hoping to interest Gudrun’s noble estates in easy maintenance,
pest-free crops now that the founding had drained their labour pool.
Betancore voxed Gudrun Control, identified us, and requested route and
permission for landfall at Dorsay, the northern capital. They obliged us
without hesitation. Another greedy trader in town for the festival.
WE SWEPT DOWN through the vast elements of Battlefleet Scarus at high-
anchor: rows of grotesque, swollen-bellied troop ships; massive destroyers
with jutting prow-rams and proud aquila emblems; the vast battleships of
the line, cold, grey orthogonal giants of space, blistered with weapon
emplacements; barbed frigates, long and lean and cruel as wood-wasps;
schools of fighter craft, running the picket.
Post-orbital space was seething with transports, scudding tugs, resupply
launches, merchant cutters, bulky service lifters and skeletal loading
platforms. Away to starboard, the mixed echelons of the merchant ships, the
bulk freighters, the sleek sprint traders, the super-massive guild ships, the
hybrid rogues. The Essene was out there somewhere.
Winking buoy lights, describing the stacks and levels of the anchor
stations, filled the night, another constellation blocking out the real
starfield.
Betancore nursed us down through the traffic, down into the crystal
bright ionosphere, down into the opalescent ranges of the high clouds. We
were heading across the crossover from night to day as the planet turned,
making for Dorsay, where dawn was coming up on another day of the
Festival of Founding.
NINE
At Dorsay.
Market forces.
In pursuit of Tanokbrey.
DORSAY WASN’T WAKING up. It had been awake all night. Vox-horns along
the old streets, avenues and canals broadcast martial themes, and streamers
and pennants flew from every available surface.
I had speed-read Aemos’s summation of the planet: Gudrun, capital of
the Helican sub-sector, Scarus Sector, Segmentum Obscurus. Boasting a
human culture for three and a half thousand years, feudally governed by
powerful noble houses, whose reach and power extended across three dozen
other worlds in the Helican sub-sector. Thracian Primaris, that vast, bloated
hub of industry and commerce, was the most populated and productive
world in the region, but Gudrun was the cultural and administrative heart.
And it was reckoned the combined wealth of the noble houses rivalled the
commercial worth of the output of the Thracian hives.
Seen from our approach run, Dorsay gleamed white in the dawn. It lay on
the coast, around the lip of a sea-fed lagoon, straddling the mighty river
Drunner. From the cutter’s ports as we turned in, we could see the white
specks of sailboats out in the lagoon basin. Beyond the vast white spread of
the city, I could see massive stockades and emplacements established in the
rolling green hills and bluffs, temporary barracks for the founding regiment.
Betancore set us down at Giova Field, the municipal port serving Dorsay.
It was built on a long, narrow island in the lagoon facing the city, and the
space premium meant smaller ships like ours were lowered on mono-tasked
heavy elevators and berthed in a honeycomb of compartments drilled into
the porous lava-rock of the island’s heart.
Lowink stayed with the cutter. Midas, Aemos, Bequin and myself
prepared to go into Dorsay. We changed into simple, anonymous clothing:
dark blue robes for Aemos, plain black suits of good cloth and long leather
coats for Betancore and myself, and a long gown of porcelain blue crepe
with a cream-lace shawl for Alizabeth Bequin. Betancore, with some
reluctance, had reopened Vibben’s possessions to find clothing suitable for
Bequin.
She didn’t seem to mind that their former owner was dead.
Under red awnings fluttering in the dawn breeze, the island jetties were
thick with passengers waiting for transport to the mainland. We queued
among groups of merchants, visiting dignitaries and fleet ratings on
furlough. Busking musicians and pedlars plied the captive audience.
At length, we hired one of the grav-skiffs lining up at the jetty. It was a
long, speartip-shaped airboat with a glossy violet hull. Open-topped, it
provided seats for six, with the steersman perched high at the aft over the
bulbous anti-grav generators. It slid us across the lagoon, keeping two
metres above the choppy, dappled water.
Dorsay rose before us. Now on its level, we could appreciate how
majestic, how towering the city was. Rising above the water on stilts
formed of vast basalt stacks and pillars, the buildings were constructed from
smoothly fitted, cyclopean stone blocks, their facades limewashed, their
shallow roofs dressed with verdigrised copper tiles. Gargoyles yawned at
gutter ends or curled around downpipes and drain sluices. Upper storeys
had balconies with railings made of tarnished copper; many balconies also
had canopies. Arched stone bridges and metal stair-walks linked
neighbouring buildings, sometimes across the water-filled streets
themselves. Along the canal sides, stone walkways formed a water-level
street for pedestrians.
And there were many of those. The place was alive with movement,
colour and noise. Once we got into the city proper, our passage down the
canals was slowed by other grav-skiffs, water-buses, private yawls and
motor-driven boats.
Above us, at high traffic levels, speeders and atmospheric fliers buzzed
back and forth. Everywhere we looked were banners celebrating Battlefleet
Scarus and the Gudrunite guard regiments, especially the 50th Rifles.
Aemos chattered to himself as usual, noting the elements of Dorsay into
his wrist slate, his hunger for accumulating knowledge unstinted. I watched
him for a while, his nervous moves, his boyish glee at new details, his
obsessive-compulsive tapping at his slate.
The keypads of that battered old slate were worn smooth.
Midas Betancore was alert and sharp as always. He sat in the front of the
grav-skiff, soaking up details like Aemos. But the details he noticed would
be far more pertinent and immediately useful than my old savant’s.
Bequin simply sat back and smiled, the chop of the breeze fluttering her
shawl. I doubted she could ever have come here under her own steam.
Gudrun was the epicentre of the sub-sector culture, the big bright world she
had always dreamed about and of which she yearned to be a part.
I let her have her fun. There would be hard work later.
WE TOOK A suite of rooms at the Dorsay Regency. I considered it
expedient to have a base of operations on the mainland. Betancore drilled
out the door frames with a hand tool and installed locator bolts with built-in
flash deterrents. We also wired the internal doorways. The house servitors
were given strict instructions not to enter when we were absent.
I STOOD ON the heavy, limewashed balcony, under a faded awning of
purple canvas, and listened to the March of the Adeptes as it played out,
distorted, from the speaker horns that dressed the street.
The canal below was thick with traffic. I saw a skiff overladen with
drunken guardsmen, all wearing their newly issued red and gold kits. Men
of the 50th Gudrunite Rifles, raising hell and risking death by drowning as
they enjoyed their last hours on their homeworld. In a few days they would
be packed into a troopship and bound for who knew what horror a sub-
sector away.
One of them fell into the canal as they tried to stagger ashore. His
comrades dredged him out, and baptised his head with the contents of a
liquor bottle.
Aemos joined me, and showed me a data-slate map.
‘The Regal Bonded Merchant Guild of Sinesias,’ he said. ‘Headquarters
are five streets away.’
GUILD SINESIAS OWNED some of the most imposing premises in the
commercial district of Dorsay. A spur of the Grand Canal actually fed in
under the coloured glass portico of the main buildings, so that visiting
traders could ran their skiffs inside and disembark under cover in a tiled and
carpeted reception dock.
Our grav-skiff carried us in, and we stepped out amid clusters of tall,
thin, gowned traders from Messina, merchants from Sameter in ludicrously
heavy hats and veils, and obese bankers from the Thracian hives.
I strode ashore and turned to offer Bequin my hand. She nodded
courteously as she left the skiff. I hadn’t briefed her much. The aristocratic
airs and graces were her own spontaneous invention. Though I still loathed
her, I admired her more with each passing moment. She was playing things
perfectly.
‘Your name and business here, sire, madam?’ a Guild Sinesias
chamberlain asked as he approached us. He was dripping in finery, gold
brocaded gowns attiring every servant in the place. Augmetic implants
blistered in place of his ears and he clutched a slate and stylus.
‘My name is Farchaval, a merchant from Hesperus. This is Lady
Farchaval. We come to tender grain contracts with the high houses of this
world, and we are told Guild Sinesias will provide us the necessary
brokerage.’
‘Do you have a guild responser, sire?’
‘Of course. My contact was Saemon Crotes.’
‘Crotes?’ the chamberlain paused.
‘Oh, Gregor, I’m so bored.’ Bequin suddenly announced. ‘This is so, so
very slow and dull. I want to cruise the canals again. Why can’t we go back
and deal with those spirited fellows at Guild Mensurae?’
‘Later, my dearest,’ I said, delighted and wrong-footed by her
improvisation.
‘You have already... visited another guild?’ the chamberlain asked
quickly.
‘They were very nice. They brought me Solian tea.’ Bequin purred.
‘Let me escort you both,’ the chamberlain said at once. ‘Saemon Crotes
is, of course, one of our most valued envoys. I will arrange an audience for
you forthwith. In the meantime, please relax in this suite. I will have Solian
tea sent up directly.’
‘And nafar biscuits?’ cooed Bequin.
‘But of course, madam.’
He swept out and closed the double doors of the luxurious waiting room
behind him. Bequin looked at me and giggled. I confess, I laughed out loud.
‘What got into you?’
‘You said we were monied merchants who expected the very best. I was
just earning my salary.’
‘Keep it up,’ I said.
We looked around the room. Gauze-draped windows ten metres high
looked out over the Grand Canal, but they were insulated to keep the noise
out. Rich tapestries dressed the walls between Sameter School oils that
Maxilla would have loved to own.
A burnished servitor brought in a tray of refreshments soon after that. It
lowered it onto a marble-topped occasional table and trundled out.
‘Solian tea!’ Bequin squeaked, lifting the lid of a porcelain pot. ‘And
nafar biscuits!’ she added with a smile, through the crumbs of the first one.
She poured me a cup and I stood by the fireplace, sipping it, striking an
appropriately haughty pose.
The guild representative flew in through the doors a moment later. He
was a small, spiky-haired man with flowing gowns and far too much
jewellery. The Guild Sinesias brand mark was proudly displayed on his
forehead.
He was, the brand indicated, property.
His name was Macheles.
‘Sire Farchaval! Madam! Had I known you were visiting, I would have
cancelled meets to be here. Forgive my tardiness!’
‘I forgive it,’ I said. ‘But I’m afraid Lady Farchaval may be fast losing
her patience.’
Bequin yawned on cue.
‘Oh, that is not good! Not good at all!’ Macheles clapped his hands and
servitors trundled in.
‘Provide the lady with whatever she requests!’ Macheles told them.
‘Ummm... vorder leaves?’ she said.
‘At once!’ Macheles instructed.
‘And a plate of birri truffles? Sautéed in wine?’
I winced.
‘At once! At once!’ Macheles yelped, shushing the servitors out of the
room.
I stepped forward and put down my cup. ‘I’ll be straight with you, sir. I
represent grain merchants on Hesperus, a significant cartel of grain
merchants.’
I handed him my holo-dent. It was fake, of course. Betancore and Aemos
had run it up, using Aemos’s profound knowledge in general and his
knowledge of Hesperus – gleaned from interviews with Maxilla – in
particular.
Macheles seemed impressed enough by my identification.
‘What sort of... size cartel are we talking about, sire?’
‘The entire western continent.’
‘And you offer?’
I produced a sample tube from my pocket. ‘A gene-fixed strain of cereal
that could be easily managed by many of your landowners now that their
workforce is depleted. It is indeed a wonder.’
The servitors reappeared, delivering Bequin’s delicacies.
As she munched the soft-fleshed birri, she said, ‘The other guilds are
bidding for this product, mister. I do hope Guild Sinesias won’t miss out.’
Macheles shook the sample tube and looked at it.
‘Is this,’ he said, his voice dropping, ‘xenos cultured?’
‘Would that be a problem?’ I asked.
‘No, sire! Not officially. The Inquisition is of course very tight about
such things. But that is precisely why we offer these discreet interviews.
The entire guild buildings are buffered against trackers, intercept beams and
vox-thieves.’
‘I am pleased to hear it. So a xenos-cultured cereal strain would not be
hard to market?’
‘Naturally not. There are collective enterprises eager for assured crop
yields. Especially those hot-housed by alien technology.’
‘Good,’ I lied. ‘But I want the best return. Saemon told me that House
Glaw should be the first to approach.’
‘Saemon?’
‘Saemon Crotes. The Guild Sinesias envoy I dealt with on Hesperus.’
‘Quite so! You wish me to arrange a trade meeting with House Glaw?’
‘I think that’s what I said, didn’t I?’
WE LEFT THE Guild Sinesias dock twenty minutes later. Bequin was still
licking her lips from the birri.
As soon as our skiff was clear of the building, the vox-ceiver woven into
my cuff began to twitch.
‘Eisenhorn.’
It was Lowink. ‘I’ve just accepted a message from Tobias Maxilla. Do
you want me to relive it?’
‘Just a summary, Lowink.’
‘He says the ship that took Eyclone’s Gudrun-Hubris run is at anchor
here. Says he’s done some probing. The Rogue Trader Scaveleur. The
master, one Effries Tanokbrey, is already planetside.’
‘Signal Maxilla and thank him for his work, Lowink,’ I said.
The identity of Eyclone’s mysterious starship was now known to me.
WE WERE TAKING lunch at a commercial tavern overlooking the Bridge of
Carnodons when Macheles sent Sire Farchaval a private text message by
vox-drone.
The drone, an oblate metal unit roughly the size of a small citrus fruit,
came buzzing into the dining terrace like a pollen-insect, scudding from
table to table at head-height on its tiny repeller motors until it found me.
Then it hovered, chimed, and beamed its holographic cargo against the side
of my crystal tumbler: the crest of Guild Sinesias, followed by a formal and
obsequious text inviting Sire Farchaval and his entourage to a meeting at
the Glaw estate the following afternoon. We were to meet Macheles at the
guild building at four, where transport would be waiting.
The drone continued to project the message until I broke the beam with a
wave of my hand and made a quick verbal assent, which it recorded.
Dismissed, it bumbled away with its answer.
‘How did it find us?’ asked Bequin.
‘A pheromonal trace,’ Aemos replied. ‘The guild building’s master
systems will have sampled you both during your visit and then it would
have come searching until it matched the record in its sensors.’
Vox-drone messaging was common practice on higher tech Imperial
worlds like this. It gave me an idea.
‘You say the guild seemed comfortable dealing with xenos material?’
Betancore was saying, raising his wine glass to sip.
I nodded. ‘We’ll concentrate on House Glaw for now. That’s where our
primary interest lies. But I’m not going to forget Sinesias. When we’re
done, the full weight of the Inquisition will come to bear on their dealings.’
Bequin was looking out at the fine ornamental bridge that arched over the
Drunner below. ‘What are those creatures?’ she asked. The stone effigies of
great quadruped predators decorated each span of the old crossing. The
beasts were huge, with powerful, mastiff-like builds, brush tails and long
snouts bristling with tusks.
‘Carnodons,’ Aemos said, once again delighted to be able to share his
considerable knowledge. ‘The heraldic animal of Gudrun. They feature in
many crests and emblems hereabouts, symbolising the noble authority of
the world. Rare now, of course. Hunted to near extinction. I believe only a
few live wild now in the northern tundra.’
‘We have a day at our disposal,’ I told them, cutting through the idle talk.
‘Let’s use it well. Let’s find this ship master, Tanokbrey.’
Betancore raised his eyebrows and was about to tell me how difficult that
was going to be, until I explained my idea to him.
WE USED A clerical bureau on a water-street off the Ooskin Canal, and
paid for a vox-drone message. I kept it simple, a brief enquiry to the master
of the Rogue Trader Scaveleur concerning the possibility of off-planet
passage. The cleric serving me took my text and payment without comment,
and loaded the message into one of the three-dozen vox-drones that lay
inert in a rack behind his seat. Then he accessed his data-files, retrieved the
pheromone trace for Tanokbrey that the ship master had logged with the
city administration at immigration, and installed that too.
The selected drone rose, buzzed, and floated away out of the office.
On the street outside, Betancore fired up the motor of the air-bike he had
rented and made off after it.
Chances were it would lead us to our quarry. If it gave Betancore the slip,
there was every reason to hope Tanokbrey would come to us. He was a
commercial merchant looking for business after all.
Aemos, Bequin and I followed in a public grav-skiff, staying in vox-
contact with Betancore. The canal traffic was thicker than ever, and local
Arbites, as well as naval security details, were out in force. There was to be
a major ceremonial cavalcade later that afternoon, and the route was being
prepared. Already, crowds of spectators were gathering on the bridges and
the walkways. Banners and well-wishing garlands were on display all
around.
Betancore was waiting for us on a walkway in the Tersegold Quarter, a
part of Dorsay famous for its taverns and clubs. I left Aemos and Bequin in
the skiff.
‘In there,’ he said, indicating an old, bow-fronted establishment. ‘I
followed it inside. It delivered to the fifth table from the left. Tanokbrey is
the tall man in the rose-red jacket. He has two men with him by my count.’
‘Stay back and be ready,’ I said.
The tavern was dark and crowded. Music and lights pulsed from the low
roof, and the air was rank with the smells of sweat, smoke, hops and the
unmistakable fumes of obscura.
My vox-drone was coming out through the door as I entered. It paused,
delivered its message and then drifted away. A curt text informed me that
the Scaveleur was not for hire.
Moving through the packed clientele, I located Tanokbrey. His rose-red
jacket was of finest silk and his frizzy black hair was raked back into twists
and tied with ribbons at the back of his head. He had a craggy, singularly
unwelcoming face. His drinking companions were a pair of common
crewmen in studded leather bodygloves.
‘Master Tanokbrey?’
He looked round at me slowly and said nothing. His comrades fixed me
with grim stares.
‘Perhaps we could talk privately?’ I suggested.
‘Perhaps you could piss off.’
I sat down anyway. His men seemed astonished at my action, and
stiffened. All Tanokbrey had to do was nod, I realised.
‘Let me start with an easy question,’ I began.
‘Start by pissing off,’ he replied. He was now fixing me with a caustic
gaze. Without breaking eye contact, I noted that his left hand was inside his
coat.
‘You seem anxious. Why is that?’
No answer. His men stirred nervously.
‘Something to hide?’
‘I’m having a quiet drink. I don’t want interruptions. Now sod off.’
‘So unfriendly. Well, if these gentlemen aren’t going to give us privacy,
I’ll press on regardless. I do hope I don’t embarrass you.’
‘Who the hell are you?’
Now I didn’t reply. My eyes never left his. ‘Your high-anchor fees are
delinquent,’ I said at last.
‘That’s a lie!’
It was, and so was what I said next. It didn’t matter. The purpose was to
undermine him. ‘And your manifest papers are incomplete. Gudrun control
may wish to impound your ship until the irregularities are cleared up.’
‘Lying bastard—’
‘It’s an easy matter. You made a run to Hubris that is not logged, nor is
any cargo list filed. How will they calculate import duties?’
His chair scraped back a centimetre or two.
‘Why were you on Hubris?’
‘I wasn’t! Who says I was?’
‘Take your pick. Saemon Crotes. Namber Wylk.’
‘Don’t know them. You’ve got the wrong man, you miserable bastard.
Now frag off!’
‘Murdin Eyclone, then. What about him? Didn’t he hire you?’
That brought the nod at last. An imperceptible motion of his head.
The crewman beside me lunged out of his seat, a compact shock-flail
snapping out of his sleeve and into his gloved hand.
‘Drop it,’ I willed, without even speaking.
The flail sparked as it bounced off the table top.
It was in my hand a second later. I whipped it back across its owner’s
face and smashed him sideways off his chair. Then I snapped it round,
crushed the left ear of the other crewman and laid him full length on the
floor at the foot of the table.
I sat back down, facing Tanokbrey, the flail in my hand. His face as grey
and his eyes darted now with panic.
‘Eyclone. Tell me about him.’
His left arm moved inside his jacket and I jabbed the flail into his
shoulder. Unfortunately, I realised he was wearing armour under that silk.
He reeled from the impact, but his arm came up all the same, a short-
snouted laspistol clutched in his fist.
I slammed the table into him and his shot went wild, punching through
the back of a nearby ruffian. The victim toppled over, bringing another table
smashing down.
Now the shot and the commotion had got the attention of the entire
tavern. There was general shouting and confusion.
I didn’t pay it any heed. Tanokbrey fired again through the overturned
table and I dove aside, colliding with milling bodies.
The merchant was on his feet, kicking and punching his way through the
mob to the exit. I could see Betancore, but the mass of bodies prevented
him from blocking Tanokbrey.
‘Aside!’ I yelled, and the crowd parted like hatch shutters.
Tanokbrey was on the walkway outside, running for the quay at the end
of the street. He turned and fired. Pedestrians screamed and ran. Someone
was pushed into the canal.
Tanokbrey leapt into a grav-skiff, shot the protesting hire-driver, pushed
the corpse off the steering perch, and gunned the craft away down the canal.
Betancore’s air-bike was sat on its kickstand to my left. I cranked the
power and swept off down the waterway in pursuit.
‘Wait! Wait!’ I heard Betancore yelling.
No time.
TANOKBREY’S FLIGHT CAUSED mayhem down the length of the busy canal.
He drove his skiff into the jostling traffic, forcing craft to heave out of his
way. Already the decorative golden filigree on the skiffs black hull was
grazed and dented with a dozen glancing impacts. People on the banks and
abroad on the water howled and yelled at him as he wrenched his way
through. Where the street met a canal thoroughfare, he tried to extend his
lead with a surge of speed. A fast-moving courier boat coming down the
stream veered at the last moment, and struck the quayside with great force,
sending the craft up over end, its hull shredding, its driver cartwheeling
through the air.
I laced the air-bike through the disrupted traffic in Tanokbrey’s wake. I
wanted to gain height, and move to a level where I could coax more speed
from the machine without fear of collision. But the vehicle’s grav-plate had
a governor unit that prevented anything more than three metres of climb. I
had no time to figure out where the governor was or how to disable it. I
aimed the bike between turning skiffs, water-buses heavy in the choppy
canal, other darting air-bikes.
Ahead, I could hear the distant sounds of military bands.
Tanokbrey whipped out of a junction into the Grand Canal, and straight
into the side of the afternoon’s parade. A slow-moving river of skiffs,
military barges and landspeeder escorts filled the entire width of the
waterway. The craft were full of jubilant Imperial Guardsmen and officers,
thundering regimental bands and battlefleet dignitaries. The air was
glittering with streamers and banners, company standards, Imperial eagles
and Gudrunite carnodons. One entire barge bore a massive golden carnodon
sculpture to which whooping guardsmen clung. Garlands fluttered from the
barrels of a thousand brandished las-rifles. The walkways and bridges of the
Grand Canal were choked with cheering civilians.
Tanokbrey’s skiff smacked into the side of a troop-barge, and angry yells
and jeers were loosed at him as he tried to turn. From the shore, the crowd
pelted him with fruit, stones and other missiles.
Cursing back at the angry soldiers, he slammed his skiff round the rear of
the barge, trying to force his way across the canal.
I was closing on him now, trying to avoid the displeasure of the mob.
Hooters and sirens bayed at him from the parade boats as he jostled across
their paths. A trooper from one barge leapt onto his skiff to waylay him, and
Tanokbrey kicked him off into the water before he could get a good footing.
That turned things even uglier. The noise of the booing and outrage was
immense. The parade bunched up badly, and dozens of furious guardsmen
pressed at the rails of their barges, trying to reach him.
He over-revved the skiff to get clear of them, and struck against a raft
carrying a company band. Several instrument players toppled with the
impact, and the proud Imperial anthem they had been playing dissolved in a
cacophony of wrong notes and broken rhythms.
Enraged troopers in a smaller skiff drew alongside him, and rocked his
craft dangerously as they tried to board. He pulled his handgun.
His last mistake. I pulled up short, and landed on the canal bank. There
was no point in pressing the pursuit now.
Tanokbrey got off two shots into the mob. Then twenty or more freshly
issued las-rifles on a neighbouring barge opened fire, smashing him and his
stolen craft to pieces. The drive unit exploded, scattering hull fragments
across the churning water. A curl of black smoke rose above the banners.
The young conscripts of the 50th Gudrunite Rifles had made the first kill
of their military careers.
TEN
A conflict of jurisdiction.
The House of Glaw.
Stalking secrets.
LONG AFTER MIDNIGHT, I was attempting to sleep in my bedchamber at
the Dorsay Regency. Bequin and Aemos had both retired to their own
rooms hours before. Reflected light from the canal outside played a series
of silver ripples across the ceiling of my twilit chamber.
‘Aegis, rose thorn!’ Betancore’s voxed whisper suddenly tapped at my
ear.
‘Rose thorn, reveal.’
‘Spectres, invasive, spiral vine.’
I was already out of bed and into my breeches and boots, pulling my
leather coat over my bare torso. I went out into the apartment lounge with
my power sword in my hand.
The lights were off, but canal reflections played in here too, creating a
fluttering half-light.
Betancore stood by the far wall, a needle pistol in each hand. He nodded
at the main door.
They were good and they were very quiet, but we could both see slight
movement against the cracks around the doors, backlit by the hall light.
A gentle vibration of the handle told me someone was springing the lock.
Betancore and I dropped back against the walls either side of the doors. We
closed our eyes and covered our ears. Any forcing of the door would trigger
the deterrent charges, and we didn’t want to wind up blind or deaf.
The door opened a crack. No flash charges roared. Our visitors had
detected and neutralised the security countermeasures. They were even
better than I first thought.
A slender telescopic rod extended smoothly in through the crack. An
optical sensor on the end slowly began to pan around, searching the room.
With a nod to Betancore, I moved forward, took hold of the rod and yanked
hard. At the same moment, I ignited my power sword.
A body crashed into the doors, dragged forward by my hefty pull on the
spy-stick, and came tumbling in. I leapt in to straddle the body, but despite
his surprise, he writhed away with a curse, and threw a punch. I had a vague
impression of a tall, thickly built man in form-fitting leather.
We flopped over together, wrestling, overturning a couch and knocking
down a candle-stand. My opponent had a good grip on the wrist of my
sword arm.
So I punched him in the throat with my left hand.
He collapsed, retching, onto the floor. I got up in time to hear a strong
voice say, ‘Put the weapons down now.’
A short, hunched figure stood in the open doorway. Betancore had both
pistols trained on it, but was slowly lowering them despite himself.
The figure had used the will. I brushed the tingle aside, but it was too
much for Midas. The needle pistols thumped onto the carpet.
‘Now you,’ the figure said, turning its silhouette towards me. ‘Disarm
that power-blade.’
I seldom had an opportunity to feel the effect of psyker manipulation.
The technique was different from the ones I employed, and the force of will
was unmistakably potent. I braced myself for the hideous strain of outright
telepathic combat.
‘You resist?’ said the figure. A blade of mental energy stabbed into my
skull, rocking me backwards. I knew at once I was fundamentally
outclassed. This was an old, powerful, practised mind.
A second stab of pain, cutting into the first. The man I had left choking
was now on his knees. Another psyker. More powerful than the first, it
seemed, but with far less control or technique. His attack seared through my
skull and made me bark out in pain, but I blocked him as I stumbled back
and stung his eager mind away with a desperate, unfocused jab.
The boiling psychic waves were rattling the windows and vibrating the
furniture. Glasses shattered and Betancore fell, whimpering. The hunched
figure stepped forward again, and dropped me to my knees with renewed
mental assaults. I felt blood spurt from my nose. My vision swam. My grip
on the sword remained tight.
Abruptly, it stopped. Roused by the disturbance, both Aemos and Bequin
had burst into the room. Bequin screamed. Her psychic blankness, abruptly
intruding on the telepathic maelstrom, suddenly blew the energies out, like
a vacuum snuffing the heart of a fire.
The hunched figure cried out and stumbled in surprise. I drove forward,
grabbed him and hurled him bodily across the chamber. He seemed frail but
surprisingly heavy for such a small mass.
Betancore recovered his weapons and lit the lamps.
The man I had pulled through the doors was little more than a youth, big
built with a long, shaved skull and a slit of a mouth. He was crumpled by
the windows, semi-conscious. He wore a black leather bodyglove adorned
with equipment harnesses. Bequin relieved him of his holstered sidearm.
The other, the hunched figure, rose slowly and painfully, ancient limbs
cracking and protesting. He wore long dark robes; his thin hands were clad
in black satin gloves. A number of gaudy rings protruded from the folds of
the gown. He pulled back his cowl.
He was very old, his weathered, lined face wizened like a fruit stone. His
throat, exposed at the gown’s neckline, betrayed traces of the augmetic
work that undoubtedly encased his age-twisted body.
His eyes blazed at me from their deep sockets with cold fury.
‘You have made a mistake,’ he said, wheezing, ‘a fatal one, I have no
doubt.’ He produced a chunky amulet and held it up. The sigil it bore was
unmistakable. ‘I am Inquisitor Commodus Voke.’
I smiled. ‘Well met, brother,’ I said.
COMMODUS VOKE STARED at my rosette for a few lingering seconds, then
looked away. I could feel the psychic throbbing of his rage.
‘We have a... conflict of jurisdiction,’ he managed to say, straightening
his robes. His assistant, now back on his feet, stood in the corner of the
chamber and gazed sullenly at me.
‘Then let us resolve it,’ I offered. ‘Explain to me why you invade my
apartments in the dead of night.’
‘My work brought me to Gudrun eight months ago. An ongoing
investigation, a complex matter. A rogue trader had come to my attention,
one Effries Tanokbrey. I had begun to close my net around him when he
was scared into flight and got himself killed. Simple cross-checking
revealed that a grain merchant called Farchaval had somehow been
instrumental in that incident.’
‘Farchaval is my cover here on Gudrun.’
‘You see fit to play-act and hide your true nature?’ he said scornfully.
‘We each have our methods, inquisitor,’ I replied.
I’d never met the great Commodus Voke before, but his reputation
preceded him. An intractable puritan in his ethic, almost leaning to the
hard-line of the monodominants but for the fact of his remarkable psychic
abilities. I believe something of a Thorian doctrine suited his beliefs. He
had served as a noviciate with the legendary Absalom Angevin three
hundred years before and since then had played a key role in some of the
most thorough and relentless purges in sector history. His methods were
open and direct. Stealth, co-operation and subterfuge were distasteful
concepts to him. He used the full force of his status, and the fear it
generated, to go where he pleased and demand anything of anyone to
achieve his goals.
In my experience, the heavy-handed, terror-inspiring approach closes as
many doors as it smashes open. Frankly, it didn’t surprise me to learn he
had already been on this planet for a full eight months.
He looked at me as if I was something he had almost stepped in. ‘I am
discomforted when I see inquisitors holding to the soft, cunning ways of the
radical. That way heresy lies, Eisenhorn.’
That made me start. I consider myself, as I have reported, very much of
the puritanical outlook. Staunch, hard-line in my own way, though flexible
enough to get the job done efficiently. Yet here was Voke gauging me as a
radical! And at that moment, next to him, I felt I may as well be the most
extreme, dangerous Horusian, the most artful and scheming recongregator.
I tried to push past that. ‘We need to share more information, inquisitor.
I’ll take a guess and say your investigation somehow involves the Glaw
family.’
Voke said nothing and showed no response, but I felt his assistant tense
psychically behind me.
‘Our work is indeed clashing,’ I went on. ‘I, too, am interested in House
Glaw.’ In short, simple terms I laid out the matter of Eyclone’s activities on
Hubris, and drew the connection to Glaw and Gudrun by way of the
mysterious Pontius.
I had his interest now. ‘Pontius is just a name, Eisenhorn. Pontius Glaw
on the other hand, is long dead. I served with worthy Angevin in the purge
that destroyed him. I saw his corpse.’
‘Yet here you are, investigating the Glaws anyway.’
He exhaled slowly, as if making his mind up. ‘After Pontius Glaw’s
eradication, the House of Glaw made great efforts to distance itself from his
heresy. But Angevin, rest his immortal soul, always suspected that the taint
ran deeper and that the family was not free of corruption. It is an ancient
house, and powerful. It is difficult to probe its secrets. But from time to
time, over the past two hundred years, I have turned my eye to them.
Fifteen months ago, prosecuting a coven on Sader VII, I uncovered traces
which suggested that particular coven, and several other minor groups, were
collectively being run by an all but invisible parent cult – a cult of great
scope and power, old and hidden, stretching across many worlds. Some
traces led to Gudrun. That Gudrun is the Glaw’s ancestral home was for me
too much of a coincidence.’
‘Now we make progress,’ I said, sitting down in a high-backed chair and
pulling on a shirt Bequin brought to me from my chamber. Aemos poured
six glasses of amasec from a decanter on the dresser. Taking one as it was
offered, Voke sat down opposite me. He sipped, contemplatively.
His assistant refused the glass that Aemos offered and remained standing.
‘Sit down, Heldane!’ Voke said. ‘We have things to learn here.’
The assistant took a glass and sat in the corner.
‘I hunt out a cabal controlled by a notorious facilitator,’ I continued, ‘a
cabal set on performing an abominable crime. The trail leads to Gudrun and
the Glaws. You do the same with another heretical cell—’
‘Three others, in fact,’ he corrected.
‘Three, then. And you see the shape of a far greater organisation. From
the facts as they stand, we are both approaching the same evil from opposite
sides.’
He licked his lips with a tiny, pallid tongue and nodded. ‘Since coming to
Gudrun I have rooted out and burned two heretical cells. I am reasonably
sure of the activities of another nine, three here in Dorsay alone. I have
allowed them to fester as I observe them. For months, they have seemed
bent on preparation for some event. Abruptly, a matter of weeks ago, their
behaviour changed. This would have been around the same time as your
confrontation on Hubris.’
‘Eyclone’s undertaking was also great, with extensive preparatory work.
Yet, at the eleventh hour, something either went wrong or plans were
suddenly changed. Though I defeated and destroyed him, his plans were
really thwarted by the fact that the Pontius didn’t arrive. What has your
work revealed of House Glaw?’
‘I have visited them twice in three months. On both occasions, they have
made every effort to answer my questions, allowing me to search the estate
and their records. I have found nothing.’
‘I fear, perhaps, that is because they knew they were dealing with an
inquisitor. Tomorrow, Sire Farchaval has a trade meeting with the Glaws at
their estate.’
He mused on this. ‘The Inquisition has a duty to stand together, firmly,
against the arch-enemies of mankind. In the spirit of co-operation, I will
wait and see what your dubious methods reveal. Precious little, I imagine.’
‘In the spirit of co-operation, Voke, I will share all I learn with you.’
‘You will do better than that. The Glaws know me, but not all of my
students. Heldane will go with you.’
‘I don’t think so.’
‘I insist. I will not have years of work ruined by another agency such as
yourself running rough-shod through the matter. I require my own observer
on the ground, or my co-operation will not be extended.’
He had me in a vice and he knew it. To refuse outright would simply
confirm my radical, careless approach in his eyes. And I had no wish to
draw battlelines against another of the Inquisition, especially a man as
powerful and influential as Commodus Voke.
‘Then he had better do exactly as I instruct him,’ I said.
WE LEFT DORSAY for the Glaw estates the next afternoon at four. Dressed
once more as wealthy but not ostentatious merchants, Bequin and I were
accompanied by Aemos, Betancore and Heldane, Voke’s man. Heldane, I
was pleased to see, had made a reasonable job of adopting simple civilian
dress. He and Betancore would pose as our bodyguard and escort, and
Aemos was to take the part of a gene-biologist.
Macheles, and four other luxuriously robed envoys from the Regal
Bonded Merchant Guild of Sinesias, were waiting for us at the guild
headquarters. An atmospheric launch had been prepared.
The launch, a burnished dart bearing the guild crest, left the landing
platform of the guild building’s roof, and rose smoothly into the overcast
sky. It was, Macheles informed us, to be a two-hour flight. A guild envoy
circulated through the richly furnished cabin with trays of refreshment.
Macheles explained our itinerary: a formal dinner with the
representatives of House Glaw that evening, an overnight stay, and then a
tour of the estates the following morning. After that, negotiations if both
parties were still interested.
We flew west, inland, leaving the inclement coastal weather behind and
passing into a sunlit landscape of rolling pasture, low hills, and maintained
forests. The snaking silver line of the Drunner winked below us. There were
occasional small settlements, farmsteads, a compact market town with a tall
Ecclesiarchy spire. Once in a while, we saw another air vehicle in the
distance.
A dark range of hills began to fill the western skyline. Evening was
beginning to discolour the clouds. The region approaching the hills rose in
bluffs and headlands, a more majestic and wild landscape, thickly wooded
on escarpments and deep vales.
Already, Macheles boasted, we were flying over Glaw property.
The estate itself loomed out of the dimming hills some minutes later: a
three-storey main house built in the neo-gothic style, dominating a bluff and
staring down across the deep valley from a hundred window eyes. The
limewashed stone glowed lambently in the twilight. Adjoining the main
structure were substantial wings built at different times. One led to stables
and other considerable stone outbuildings along the edge of the woodland,
and I presumed this to be the servants’ block. The other wing edged the
crown of the bluff, and was dominated by a dome that shone gold in the
sinking sun. The place was huge, and no doubt labyrinthine. The population
of a modest town could have been accommodated within it.
The launch settled onto a wide stone yard behind the house. At the edge
of the yard, in what looked like converted coach houses, three other
launches were stationed in hangars with well-equipped maintenance bays.
We disembarked into the yard. The air was cold and a night breeze was
bringing spots of rain with it. The wind sighed in the stands of trees beyond
the house. Heavy bars of cloud laced the evening sky above the towering
hills.
Servants in dark green liveries hurried out to us, taking up our luggage
and raising wide, long-handled parasols to shield us from the drizzle. A
number of uniformed guards from the Glaws’ house retinue flanked the
yard. Haughty and confident in their long emerald stormcoats and plumed
silver helmets, the guards seemed like experienced veterans to my eyes.
The servants escorted us and the guild envoys into an atrium with a black
and white tiled floor and a bright, silvery cast to the light. Dozens of vast
crystal chandeliers hung from the high, arched roof. More guards flanked
the doorways. The Glaws’ militia was clearly sizeable.
‘Welcome to the House of Glaw,’ a woman’s voice said.
She approached us, a well-made woman of good, high stock, her
powdered face bearing the proud insouciance of all nobility. She wore a
regal black gown, floor length and wide in the skirt and laced with a silver
over-stitching, and a great twin-cusped head-dress of black mesh and pearls
that tied under her chin with a wide black ribbon.
Macheles and the envoys bowed ceremoniously and the five of us made
more conservative nods.
‘The Lady Fabrina Glaw,’ announced Macheles. She approached, green-
coated servants forming a human wake behind her.
‘Lady,’ I said.
‘Sire Farchaval. I am so pleased to meet you.’
SHE GAVE US a brief tour of the main house. I have seldom seen such
extravagance and riches outside of an Imperial court – or Tobias Maxilla’s
staterooms. Lean hunting dogs trotted with us. She pointed out a number of
ancient paintings, mostly oil portraits, but some exquisite hololithic works,
as well as vivid psyk-pict miniatures. Her illustrious family... uncles,
grandfathers, cousins, matriarchs, warlords. Here was Vernal Glaw in the
dress uniform of the house militia. Here was Orchese Glaw entertaining the
royal house of Sameter. Over there, Lutine and Gyves Glaw, brothers at the
hunt. There great Oberon himself, in the robes of an Imperial commander,
one hand resting on an antique globe of Gudrun.
The envoys made appropriate noises of admiration. Fabrina herself
seemed to just be going through the motions. She was acting the hostess.
We were, after all, just grain merchants. This was a duty. An obligation.
I saw Aemos making surreptitious notes. I too made careful observations,
especially of the house geography. In one long hallway, the stone floor was
dressed by the rather worn pelts of three carnodons, skinned, spread-eagled,
their massive tusked mouths and baleful eyes frozen in attitudes of rage.
Even in this sad state, the size and power of these creatures spoke for
themselves.
‘We hunted them, but there are few left now,’ Fabrina Glaw remarked,
off-hand, seeing my interest. ‘Old times, long passed. Life was rather more
feudal then. Today, House Glaw looks entirely to the future.’
AT DINNER, IN the massive banqueting hall, we were joined by Urisel
Glaw, the commander of the house militia, and his eldest brother, Oberon,
the current Lord Glaw. But the dinner was not solely in our honour. A
cousin of the Glaw family and his entourage were visiting from off-world,
as were several other trade delegations and a wealthy ship master called
Gorgone Locke.
I was not surprised. Visiting grain traders, even ones accompanied by the
prestigious Guild Sinesias, hardly merited a formal banquet. It was
appropriate we should be honoured by our inclusion at a larger event. No
doubt we were meant to be impressed.
I attended with Bequin and Aemos. There was no place for servants and
bodyguards here, so Betancore and Heldane had been escorted to our suite
and food provided for them there. That suited my approach fine.
There were five long tables in the hall, laden with roast meat, fruit and
countless delicacies. Attentive butlers and serving staff moved everywhere,
offering platters and topping up glasses. Stern members of the house militia
in green and brocade dress uniforms and polished silver helmets stood at
every corner of the chamber.
We were on the third table, with a contingent of livestock merchants from
Gallinate, a city on Gudrun’s southern continent. Our status afforded us the
company of Lady Fabrina, Captain Terronce from the household guard, and
a talkative man named Kowitz, a House Glaw official responsible for
buying produce.
Lord Oberon and his brother, Urisel, presided over the head table, with
their visiting cousin, the ship master Locke and an elderly ecclesiarch called
Dazzo. Kowitz was happy to tell me that Ecclesiarch Dazzo represented a
missionary order from the sub-sector edgeworld Damask, which House
Glaw was sponsoring.
In fact, it was difficult to shut Kowitz up. As the butlers refilled his cup,
he rattled on, identifying the other parties of guests. House Glaw had
interests on worlds throughout the sub-sector, and regular banquets such as
this oiled the wheels and kept things moving.
Eventually, I managed to hand Kowitz off to Aemos, the only man I
knew capable of out-talking him. The two fell to complex discussion of the
sub-sector balance of trade.
I kept a close eye on the head table. Urisel Glaw, a bloated, thick-set man
in bejewelled ceremonial battledress, was giving Gorgone Locke plenty of
attention. I watched Urisel closely. There was something about the man, not
the least that his wide, puffy face and slick, lacquered hair made his
resemblance to portraits of his infamous ancestor Pontius uncanny. He
drank unstintingly, and laughed a wet, loose laugh at the ship master’s
jokes. His fat, powerful fingers constantly pulled at the braided collar of his
uniform jacket to ease his wide neck.
Lord Oberon was a taller, leaner man with generous, cliff-like
cheekbones rising above a forked goatee. The familial characteristics of the
Glaw line were plain in his physiognomy, but he was more regal and
distinguished, and lacked the dissolute languor of his younger sibling. Lord
Glaw spent the night chatting happily with his off-world cousin, a
bumptious young cretin with a whooping laugh and flamboyant courtly
manners. But his real interest seemed to lie with the quiet ecclesiarch,
Dazzo.
I took note of the ship master too. Gorgone Locke was a raw-boned giant
with hooded, sunken eyes. He had long red hair, tied back and beaded, and
his jutting chin was peppered with silver stubble. I wondered about his ship,
and his business. I would contact Maxilla and make enquiries.
The banquet lasted until past midnight. As soon as was polite, we retired
to our rooms.
The Glaws had given us a suite of rooms in the west wing. Outside, the
wind had got up, and was making plaintive sighs down the old chimney
flues and open grates. Rain pattered against windows, and doors and
shutters twitched and knocked in the drafts.
Heldane was alone in the suite’s sitting room when we came back. He
had several data-slates open for study on a table and looked up as we came
in.
‘Well?’ I asked him.
He and Betancore had run sweeps of the immediate wing whilst we had
been dining. He showed me the results. Most of the rooms were spy-wired
with vox-thieves and a few pict-sensors, and there was a complex
infrastructure of alarm systems. Heldane had set up a small jammer to blind
the spy-ware in our suite.
‘Comparisons,’ he said, showing me an overlay of two charts on a data-
slate. ‘The green areas show the parts of the buildings my master gained
access to during his visits.’ Voke had been obliging enough to supply me
with reports of his inspections.
‘We can overlay in red the results of the sweeps your man and I have
managed to make this evening.’
There were considerable discrepancies. Voke may have opened every
door he could find, but this showed me ghost areas that he had not gained
access to because he hadn’t known they were there.
‘These are cellars?’ I asked.
‘Underground rooms, certainly,’ said Heldane. He had a soft, sickly voice
that seemed to seep from his slit-like mouth. ‘Adjoining the wine vaults.’
The drapes billowed in as an exterior window opened. Betancore, his
hooded black bodyglove wet with rain, climbed inside. He pulled off his
grip-gloves and boots, and unstrapped his equipment harness.
‘What did you find?’
Dripping and cold, he took a glass of spirits Bequin brought him and
showed me his scanner pad.
‘The roof is lousy with alarms. I didn’t dare probe too far, even with my
jammers and sensors. There are rooms under the east wing that Inquisitor
Voke didn’t know about. A network of tunnels seems to link them to the
west wing under the courtyard.’
I spent a few more minutes running through the details, and then went
into my room to change.
I put on a heat-insulated bodyglove of matt-black plastic weave with a
tight-fitting hood and supple gloves. Then I strapped a webbing harness
around my torso and filled the integral pouches with a compact scope, a set
of multi-keys, a folding knife, two spools of monofilament wire, a tubular
torch, two jamming units and a scanner pad. I secured my vox-unit’s
earpiece under my hood, buckled an autopistol into the rig strapped across
my chest, dropped two spare clips into a thigh pouch, and finally placed my
inquisitorial rosette in my hip pocket.
This was an endeavour that risked discovery. The rosette would be my
joker, to be played if it became necessary.
I went back into the sitting room and laced on the grip-gloves and grip-
boots that Betancore had been using.
‘If I’m not back in a hour, you can start to worry,’ I told them.
OUTSIDE, BLACKNESS, RAIN and the assault of the wind.
The outside wall of the great house was soaked and old, the limewash
crumbling in places. I had to test every move I made to make sure the
overlapping teeth of the grip-pads on my hands and feet were secure.
I moved along the side of the house, feeling my way, until I was able to
crouch on an outcrop of guttering. I’d taped Betancore’s data-slate to my
left forearm for easy reference. The tiny backlit screen showed a three-
dimensional model of the building, and an inertial locator built into the slate
moved the map and kept my current location centred.
Over the downpour, I heard feet crunching gravel two storeys below. I
clung to the bricks and tapped off the slate so that the screen glow wouldn’t
give me away.
Two men from the house militia huddled in foul-weather capes passed
below me, lit by the windows on the ground floor. They took shelter in a
doorway porch and shortly after that I saw the flash of an igniter or match.
Presently, the cloying odour of obscura drifted up to me.
They were almost directly below my perch and I didn’t dare move until
they were gone. I waited. My joints were going numb from the cold and
from the hunched position I had been forced to adopt simply to stay on the
gutter.
The rain grew still heavier and the wind swished the invisible trees of the
steep woods behind the house. I could hear the men chatting. An occasional
laugh.
This wouldn’t do. I was losing time and the feeling in my legs.
I focused, drew in a calming breath and reached out with the will.
I found their minds, two warm traces in the cold below me. They were
soft and blurred, their responses undoubtedly slowed by the opiate effects of
the obscura. Difficult minds to plant strong suggestions in, but vulnerable to
paranoia.
I drove in with the will, toying gently with their anxieties.
Within seconds, they started from the cover of the porch, hissing
animatedly at each other, and headed off at a trot across the yard.
Relieved, I moved down the wall, bracing my weight against a jutting
window ledge as I found footholds around a down-pipe bracket.
On the ground, I hugged the shadows of the west wing, and moved down
the yard. Betancore’s careful reconnaissance had shown up laser trips
around the gatehouse, and others that extended from the edges of the border
beds to the basin of a fountain in the yard. Though I could not see them,
they were precisely marked on the slate, and I simply stepped over each in
turn, all except the last, which ran at waist height and which I ducked under.
My goal was the launch hangars on the far side of the rear yard. The
sweeps had shown up an access point to the cellar network there. Betancore
had located others, but they were all in private areas of the house, or in staff
sections such as the scullery, the cold store and the meat pantries.
The shutter doors of the launch hangars were closed, and the lights off
within. I gripped my way up the outside stone, and up along the shallow
tiled roof. At the summit of each hangar roof was a metal box-vent
designed to expel exhaust fumes. With my folding knife, I prised a louvred
metal panel away and slid into the duct, feet first.
The short metal funnel of the duct was open below me and I looked down
at the top of a parked launch. A short drop and I was crouching on the back
of the vehicle in the dim garage.
I got off the craft and went around behind it. A small wall-hatch led
through into a servicing workshop, which then opened into a parts store.
The ferrocrete floor was spotted with oil, and I had to move carefully in the
dark to avoid knocking into obstructions such as lathes, tool-trolleys and
dangling hoist chains.
I checked the slate. The access-way was at the rear of the parts store.
This door was taking itself much more seriously. A tamper-proof
ceramite seal, a tumbler alarm and a keypad for entry-codes.
I sighed, though I hadn’t expected this to be easy. I would need to tape a
jammer to the latch to avoid tripping any alarm or access signal. Then it
would be a job for the scanner to search and configure a usable code. Ten
minutes’ work if I was lucky. Hours if not.
I pulled off my grip gloves so I could more easily manipulate the tools,
and paused. An idea struck me. My mentor, the mighty Hapshant, had
lacked psychic skills of his own. A dyed in the wool monodominant,
Emperor love him. But he had been a firm believer in gut-instinct. He told
me a servant of the Emperor could do worse than trust a flash of instinct. In
his opinion, the Emperor himself placed such feelings there.
I tapped the word ‘daesumnor’ into the pad. The lock cycled and the door
opened.
A CLEAN, WARM, well-ventilated staircase, significantly newer than the
main structures of the estate, took me down into the cellar system. There
was a caged lamp every three metres down the wall. By the chart and my
estimation, I was some ten metres underground, moving beneath the east
wing. I removed my hood to hear better.
‘Daesumnor’ opened another hatch, and I entered a long hall with hatch-
doors along one side. One stood open, and I could hear voices and smell
smoke.
I edged along, and skirted the hatch so I could peer in.
‘...secured with two weeks,’ a voice was saying.
‘Said that month ago!’ another snorted. ‘What’s the matter, you trying to
inflate your fee?’
The room was some kind of lounge or study. Books and slates were
racked with archive-like precision in wooden stacks along the walls. Soft
light glowed from pendant lamps, and also from a number of sealed, glass-
topped caskets in front of the shelving. They reminded me of the protective,
controlled environment units Imperial libraries used to display especially
ancient and valuable texts.
The room was carpeted, and as I craned round, I could see four men
sitting around a low table in throne-like armchairs. One had his back to me,
but from the folds of his coat falling over the chair’s arm, I was certain it
was Urisel Glaw. Facing him, sitting back in his chair, was the ship master,
Gorgone Locke. The other two I didn’t know, but I had a feeling they’d
both been at the dinner. They all had glasses of liquor and one of the
unknown men was using a water-pipe to inhale obscura. Various objects lay
on the table between them, some wrapped in velvet, others unwrapped and
displayed. They looked like stone tablets, old relics of some sort.
‘I’m just trying to explain the delay, Glaw,’ Locke said. ‘They’re a
difficult enough culture to deal with at the best of times.’
‘That’s why we pay you,’ Glaw said with a scoffing laugh. He leaned
forward and toyed with one of the tablets.
‘But we won’t stand much further delay. We’ve invested a great deal in
this matter. Time, funds, resources. It’s meant holding back or cancelling
other enterprises, some of them very special to us.’
‘You will not be disappointed, lord,’ said the man with the narco-pipe. He
was dressed simply in black, a slightly built, bald individual with watery
blue eyes. ‘The archeoxenon provenance of these items speaks for itself.
The saruthi are serious about their offer.’
Urisel started to reply and got to his feet. I ducked into cover and then
moved away down the hall. Eyclone’s code opened the door at the end and I
crept through into a wide, circular vault. Two more hatches of regular
pattern led off to either side. Ahead of me was a larger archway protected
by a force screen instead of a door.
I backed into hiding alongside this opening as someone cancelled the
force screen from inside. A figure stepped out, turning to raise the screen
again. It was Kowitz.
I took him from behind, an arm locked around his throat to silence him,
another hand pinning his right arm. He gurgled and struggled. I twisted him
round and slammed his head against the doorframe.
Kowitz went limp. I dragged him in through the open force-portal. A
control on the inner wall raised the screen again.
The chamber was long with a low ceiling. The climate-controlled air was
dry. I realised it was a chapel of sorts, a stone-floored, rectangular nave
leading to a shape that seemed to me an altar. The room was otherwise bare
of features, even seats or pews. Light glowed from recessed lamps in the
roof. Leaving Kowitz on the floor, I strode down the length of the chapel
and took a closer look at the altar.
It was two metres high, black, fashioned from a single piece of obsidian.
The glassy stone seemed to glow with an internal light. On top of it was a
jewelled prayer box about thirty centimetres square. I lifted the lid carefully
with the blade of my knife-tool. In a bed of velvet lay an intricate sphere. It
looked like a jagged lump of quartz, the size of a clenched fist, inlaid with
gold circuits and complex woven wires, like an oversized uncut gemstone
in a bizarre, ornate setting.
I spun around at a sound from behind me.
Kowitz, blood dripping from his dented forehead, stood pointing a
laspistol at me. His face was pale, angry, confused.
‘Step away from the Pontius, scum,’ he said.
ELEVEN
Revelations.
The noble sport.
Pacification 505.
THIS WAS NO place to be trapped. I dug into my reserves of concentration,
and without any physical movement, struck him clean between the eyes.
A psychic goad like that, especially at close range and with a clear line of
sight, should have felled him like a force hammer. Kowitz didn’t even
blink.
‘Don’t make me repeat myself,’ he said, raising the weapon so it pointed
at my head.
The room was psychically shielded, it had to be. Either that or something
was leeching psychic energies out of the very air.
‘There’s been a misunderstanding, Kowitz,’ I said. ‘I went for a walk and
must have taken a wrong turn.’
It was pretty lame, but I wanted to keep his responses engaged and his
mind busy.
‘I don’t think so,’ he hissed. He was groping behind himself with his free
hand, trying to find the control panel for the entrance. There was an alarm
stud on it.
I waited. At any second, he was going to glance round involuntarily to
help his fumbling.
When the gesture came, I threw myself forward and down, pulling my
autopistol.
He looked back with a cry and fired, but his aim was too high and the
shot flared off the end wall.
From a prone stance, I punched two shots through his left collar bone,
and threw him back against the force door, which crackled at the impact.
Kowitz collapsed face down on the floor and blood began to pool around
him.
I reached the door control. An amber rune was flashing. The bastard had
managed to press something. I hit the force door deactivator.
Nothing.
I punched ‘daesumnor’ into the key pad.
Nothing.
I realised I was in deep trouble.
I guessed that Kowitz had hit an alarm that locked everything out. That
was what prevented me from opening the door.
Urisel Glaw and several of his house militia appeared outside the
shimmering force door. I could see them peering in and shouting.
I backed from the doorway and snatched up Kowitz’s laspistol. When the
door opened, I would use both guns to take down anything that tried to get
in.
Then something psychic, dark and monstrously powerful rushed into my
mind from somewhere behind me and I blacked out.
A FACE WAS looking down at me as I came round. A handsome face with
blank eyes. The face started to say something. Then it combusted and
melted away, and I realised it was just a dream. And I awoke properly, into
a world that was nothing but pain.
‘ENOUGH. DON’T KILL him,’ said a voice. Another voice laughed, and a
tremor of acute agony peeled through my forebrain, lungs and gut.
‘Enough, I said! Locke!’
A mild, disappointed curse. The agony receded, and I was left with
numbness and throbbing background pain.
I was spreadeagled, my wrists and ankles bitten by the manacles that
locked me to a massive hardwood cross. They’d taken my equipment,
harness, hood, earpiece, and everything else except the leggings of my
bodyglove and my boots. What could only be dried blood caked my lips,
mouth, chin and throat, and fresh blood still drooled from my nose.
I opened my eyes. A meaty fist was holding my inquisitorial rosette in
front of my face.
‘Recognise this, Eisenhorn?’
I spat blood.
‘Thought you’d wile your way in among us and then produce this crest
and make us all cower in fear?’
Urisel Glaw took the rosette away and peered down into my face.
‘Doesn’t work that way with the House of Glaw. We’re not afraid of your
kind.’
‘Then you... are very foolish indeed,’ I said.
He slammed my head back into the cross with an open-palmed blow to
my forehead.
‘You think your friends are going to help you? We’ve rounded them all
up. They’re just down the cell-block yonder.’
‘I’m perfectly serious,’ I said. ‘Others know I’m here. And you really
don’t want to be messing with a servant of the Inquisition, no matter how
much at your mercy you think he is.’
Glaw hunched down in front of me, his hands steepled. ‘Don’t worry. I
don’t underestimate the Inquisition. I’m just not afraid of it. Now, there are
some questions I’d like answers to...’
He got up and moved back. I saw the filthy stone of the cell-chamber we
were in, a double-locked hatch up in one corner at the head of a flight of
stone steps. Lord Oberon Glaw and the obscura pipe-smoker from the
library room stood at the foot of the steps, watching intently. The ship
master, Gorgone Locke, sat astride a dirty wooden bench near by. He wore
some strange apparatus on his right hand, a glove of segmented metal that
ended each digit with a needle-like spike.
‘You’ve got it wrong, Glaw. It’s you who will provide the answers.’
Urisel Glaw nodded to Locke, who got up and moved towards me,
flexing the needle glove.
‘That is a strousine neural scourge. Our friend Mr Locke is quite an
expert in its application. We were delighted when he volunteered to run this
interrogation.’
Locke grabbed me by the throat with his bare hand, twisted my head up
and his gloved fist disappeared out of my field of view below.
A second later, and cold lances of pain threaded my lungs and heart, and
my windpipe went into spasm. I began to choke.
‘Educated man like you knows all about pressure points,’ Locke said,
conversationally. ‘So do the strousii. But they like to do more than tap them
– they like to burn them out. I studied with one of their sacred torturers for a
year or so. This grip, for example, the one that’s choking you. It’s also
paralysing your respiratory system, and stopping your heart.’
I could barely hear him. Blood was drumming in my ears and explosive
light and colour patterns were fogging my vision.
He withdrew his glove. The pain and choking stopped.
‘Just like that, I can stop your heart. Burst your brain. Blind you. So play
along.’
With all the strength I could muster, I smiled and told him his sister had
particularly commended my love-making skills over his.
The glove gripped my face and needles lanced into my cheeks. I blacked
out again for a moment.
‘...haven’t killed him!’ I heard Locke hiss as consciousness swam back.
Dull pain oozed through my face.
‘Look at him! Look at him! Where’s that cocksure smile now, you little
bastard?’
I didn’t answer.
Locke leaned close so his brow pressed against mine and his eyes were
all I could see. ‘Needlework,’ he snarled, his foul, obscura-flavoured breath
swamping my gasping mouth. ‘I just lanced a few points in your face.
You’ll never smile again.’
I thought about telling him I didn’t see a lot to smile about, but I didn’t.
Instead, I lunged forward and bit into his mouth.
His scream, transmitted by our contact, shook my jaws. Blood spurted.
Fists struck repeatedly and desperately against my skull and neck. His long
red hair came loose and the beaded ends whipped about my head. At last,
he tore away, roaring. I retched out a mouthful of blood and a good fleshy
lump of his lower lip.
His gloveless hand clamped around his torn mouth, Locke stumbled
back, enraged, and then hurled himself at me. He kicked hard into my belly
and hip, and punched me in the cheek so forcefully, it nearly snapped my
spine apart.
Then I felt the needles stab in between my ribs on my left side, and
breathless agony enfolded me.
Locke was screaming obscenities into my face. Once again, pain blacked
me out.
I came back in a rush of excruciating discomfort and gasping breath as
Urisel wrenched Locke off me and threw him across the cell.
‘I want him alive!’ Urisel bawled.
‘Look what he did!’ Locke complained incoherently through blood and
torn lips.
‘You should have been more careful,’ said Oberon Glaw, stepping
forward. He leaned down to study me, and I gazed back into his haughty,
leonine face, bearded, powerful, commanding.
‘He’s halfway to death,’ Oberon said with annoyance. ‘I told you fools I
wanted answers.’
‘Ask me yourself,’ I gasped.
Lord Oberon raised his eyebrows and stared at me. ‘What brought you to
my house, inquisitor?’
‘The Pontius,’ I replied. It was a gamble, and I wasn’t hopeful, but there
was always a chance that the very word might auto-slay them as it had done
Saemon Crotes in the Sun-dome on Hubris. As I suspected, it didn’t.
‘You came from Hubris?’
‘I stopped Eyclone’s work there.’
‘It was aborted anyway,’ Lord Oberon stepped back from me.
‘What is the Pontius?’ I asked, trying and failing to focus my will. The
pain in my body was overpowering.
‘If you don’t know, I’m hardly going to tell you,’ said Oberon Glaw.
He looked round at Urisel, Locke and the pipe-smoker.
‘I don’t think he knows anything about the true matter. But I want to be
certain. Can you be trusted to work efficiently, Locke?’
Locke nodded. He approached me again, flexing the needle glove, and
slid a needle into my head behind my ear.
My skull went numb. It became almost impossible to concentrate.
‘My index needle is lancing right into your parieto-occipital sulcus,’
Locke crooned in my ear, ‘directly influencing your truth centre. You
cannot lie, no matter what. What do you know of the true matter?’
‘Nothing...’ I stammered.
He jiggled the needle and pain ignited inside my head.
‘What is your name?’
‘Gregor Eisenhorn.’
‘Where were you born?’
‘DeKere’s World.’
‘Your first sexual conquest?’
‘I was sixteen, a maid in the scholam...’
‘Your darkest fear?’
‘The man with blank eyes!’
I blurted out the last. All were true, all involuntary, but that last one
surprised even me.
Locke wasn’t finished. He jiggled the needle, and pierced the back of my
neck with others so that my body went into paralysis and ice flowed down
my veins.
‘What do you know of the true matter?’
‘Nothing!’
Without wanting to, I began to weep with the pain.
GORGONE LOCKE CONTINUED to question me for four hours... four hours
that I know about. Beyond those I recall nothing.
I WOKE AGAIN, and found myself lying on a cold rockcrete floor.
Lingering pain and fatigue filled every atom of my being. I could barely
move. At that time in my life, I had never felt such an extremity of pain and
despair. I had never felt so close to death.
‘Lie still, Gregor... you’re with friends...’ That voice. Aemos.
I opened my eyes. Uber Aemos, my trusted savant, looked down at me
with a soulful expression even his augmetic eyes couldn’t hide. He was
bruised about the face and his good robe was torn.
‘Lay still, old friend,’ he urged.
‘You know me, Aemos,’ I said, and slowly sat up. It was quite a task.
Various muscle groups refused to work, and I came close to vomiting.
I looked around blearily.
I was lying on the floor of a circular rockcrete cell. There was a hatch on
one side, and a cage-gated exit opposite it. Aemos was crouched near me,
and Alizabeth Bequin, her gown ripped and dirty, hunched behind him,
staring over at me with genuine concern. Away across the cell stood
Heldane, arms folded, and behind him cowered the guilder Macheles and
the four other Guild Sinesias envoys who had escorted us. All of them
looked pale and hollow eyed as if they had been weeping. There was no
sign of Betancore.
Aemos saw my look and said, ‘Aegis insubstantial, before the deluge’ in
perfect Glossia.
Which meant Betancore had somehow avoided the sweep that had
incarcerated all my other companions. A tiny fragment of good news.
I got up, mainly thanks to my determination and the support of Aemos
and Bequin. I was still stripped down to my leggings and boots, and my
torso, neck, arms and head were washed in my own blood and stippled with
bruised micro-puncture wounds. Gorgone Locke had been thorough.
Gorgone Locke would pay.
‘What do you know?’ I asked them as my breath returned.
‘We’re as good as dead,’ Heldane said frankly. ‘No wonder my master
leaves this kind of work to you suicidal radicals. I just wish I hadn’t agreed
to join you.’
‘Thank you for that, Heldane. Anyone else want to offer something less
editorial?’
Aemos smiled. ‘We’re in a prison cell under the west wing, to the rear,
almost under the woodlands. They burst into our quarters after you’d been
gone three hours and seized us at gunpoint. I memorised a careful note of
the route we were taking to this place, and have mentally compared it with
Midas’s map, so I’m fairly sure of our location.’
‘What the hell did they do to you?’ Bequin asked, dabbing at wounds on
my chest with a strip of cloth torn from her gown.
Wincing, I realised that was why her gown was so shredded. She had
been mopping my wounds while I was unconscious. A pile of torn and
blood-soaked scads of material nearby stood testament to her devotion.
‘They came here an hour ago and tossed you in with us. They didn’t say
anything,’ Heldane added.
‘Are you really an inquisitor, Sire Farchaval?’ Macheles asked, stepping
forward.
‘Yes, I am. My name is Eisenhorn.’
Macheles began to sob and his fellow envoys did the same.
‘We are dead. You have taken us to our deaths!’
I felt some pity for them. Guild Sinesias was rotten to the core, and these
men were corrupt, but they were only in this predicament because I had
duped them.
‘Shut up!’ Heldane told them.
He looked round at me, and slid a tiny something from the cuff of his
body-glove. A small red capsule.
‘What is it?’
‘Admylladox, a ten gram dose. You look like you need it.’
‘I don’t use drugs,’ I said.
He pushed it into my hand. ‘Admylladox is a pain-killer and a mind
clearer. I don’t care if you do drugs or not, I want that in your system if that
gate opens.’
I looked at the gate.
‘Why?’
‘Have you never been to a pit-fight?’ he said.
THE GLAWS HAD got everything out of me they could. Now they wanted
me dead. Me and my party.
And that meant sport.
The gate cranked open at what must have been dawn. Thin, grey light
wafted in and was almost immediately replaced by hard, bright artificial
luminescence.
House Glaw militiamen in body armour burst into our cell and drove us
out through the gate with force shields and psyk-whips.
WE WERE OUT in the open, blinking into the light, as the gate shut behind
us.
I gazed around. A vast circular amphitheatre, enclosed by a dome high
above, undoubtedly the golden dome we had seen on our approach. The
floor of the pit was dank moss and earth, and lichen climbed the sheer sides
of the ten-metre-high stone walls. Above the wall top, House Glaw and its
guests sat in steep tiers, jeering down at us. I saw Urisel Glaw, Lord
Oberon, Locke, Lady Fabrina, the ecclesiarch Dazzo, the pipe-smoking
man. Terronce, the militia captain who had sat at our table during dinner,
led an honour guard of nearly forty men of the retinue. All wore green
armour, plumed silver helmets and all carried autoguns. More than two
hundred baying members of the Glaw clan, house staff, militia and servants
made up the rest of the crowd in the theatre. They’d been up all night,
drinking and doing whatever other indulgence it took to turn them into
hyperactive bloodthirsty hyenas by first light.
Ignoring the noise, I surveyed the compound. Breaks of trees sprouted at
various places, and there were low outcrops of bare rock, giving the arena a
sort of landscape.
Nearby stood a rack of rusty weapons. Macheles and his brethren had
already rushed to it and taken blunt shortswords and toothless lances.
I went over and took a basket-hiked dagger and an oddly hooked scythe
with a serrated inner blade.
I weighed them in my hands.
Heldane had taken a dagger and a long-hafted axe, Bequin a wicker
shield and a stabbing knife. Aemos shrugged and took nothing.
The jeering and booing welled around us. Then it hushed and a chorus of
gasps whispered from the auditorium.
The carnodon was six metres from nose to whipping tail. Nine hundred
kilos of muscle, sinew, striped pelt and sawing tusks.
It came out from behind one of the clumps of trees, trailing a line of
heavy chain behind it from its spiked collar, accelerated into a pounce and
brought Macheles down.
Macheles, envoy of Guild Sinesias, screamed as he was destroyed. He
screamed and shrieked far longer than seemed possible given the spurting
body parts the carnodon was ripping away. It must have been my horrified
imagination, but to me the screaming only stopped when he was a gnawed
ribcage being shaken in the bloody moss by the vast predator.
The other envoys screamed and ran. One fainted.
‘We’re dead,’ Heldane said again, raising his weapons.
I swallowed the capsule he had given me. It didn’t make me feel much
better.
Its huge bared mouth running with blood and its chain jingling, the
carnodon turned on the other envoys.
Bequin shrieked.
A second carnodon sprang out of its trap towards us. It was slightly larger
than the first, I noticed. It came right for me.
I stumbled and dived to my right and the feline dug its claws into the
moss to arrest its pounce, overshooting and scrabbling round. Its trailing
chain swished over my head. The creatures both made low, sub-sonic
growls that shuddered in their cavernous throats and thumped the air.
The larger beast swung around and made for me again even as I regained
my feet and leapt backwards. Heldane ran in from the side while its
attention was on me, and hacked into its flank with the blade of his axe.
The carnodon issued a strangulated hiss and lashed around, hurling
Voke’s man across the arena, the clothing of his torso shredded by deep
parallel claw marks. I jumped away and got a few of the twisted trees
between it and myself.
The first carnodon had brought down another of the envoys. The shock of
the impact and the crippling wounds simply silenced the man and he uttered
no sound as his limp body was thrashed and worried.
The creatures were hungry – that much was evident from their prominent
ribs. One factor in our favour then... when the carnodons brought down
prey they were primarily interested in consuming it. The long chains
secured them to ground spikes next to their traps, and allowed them free
movement anywhere in the pit. Clearly the chains were measured carefully
to prevent them leaping clear of the pit into the crowd.
Tail slashing back and forth, the larger predator circled the edge of the
arena-bowl, its dark, deep-set eyes surveying the humans in range. Bequin
had dug herself and Aemos into a corner, using her frail shield and a wall
buttress as cover for them both, but the ruthless crowd were pelting them
with coins and bottles and pieces of food to drive them out. They wanted
sport. They wanted blood.
The circling carnodon, barking vapours of breath and spittle from its
dripping snout, came round and began to accelerate towards Bequin and
Aemos. Its pouncing mass alone would kill them, I was certain. I ran out
from cover to intercept it side on, and the crowd whooped and stamped.
It faltered in its ran up as it became aware of me rushing it from the
flank, and started to turn as I cut in with the scythe. The old hook planed
matted fur from its shoulder blade and left a long red scratch down its ribs.
It turned hard to face me. A paw lashed out, jabbing. I jumped back, swung
again, hoping to at least hit the huge paw, for its reach was far longer than
mine. Then it threw itself forward, a throbbing roar welling from its throat.
I simply dropped on my back, stealing its chance to knock me down and
shatter my bones. Then it was on me and over me, a paw crashing and
slicing my chest, its head down, mouth open, reaching to bite off my face.
Frantically, I thrust with my weapons, blind, and kicked up at its more
vulnerable underside.
The weight was off me abruptly. The carnodon jerked away, making a
terrible low moaning. My dagger was no longer in my hand.
The pommel was jutting down out of the beast’s chin. The blade
transfixed its mouth, pinning it closed. It pawed and tore at the weapon,
trying to dislodge it, shaking its massive head like a horse bothered by a fly.
I got up. Blood ran from the fresh gashes on my chest. Heldane suddenly
crossed my field of vision, his shredded tunic fluttering behind him. His axe
came down square onto the great carnivore’s back, cutting through the
backbone with a loud crack. The carnodon went into spasms, thrashing and
clawing, rolling in the dirt. Heldane brought the axe down again and stove
in its skull.
The audience shook the pit with their howling. Missiles rained down on
us. Heldane turned and looked at me with a murderous grin of triumph.
Then the huge weight of the other carnodon hit him from behind and
flattened him face down into the arena floor.
It had finished with the other envoys, all except the one who had fainted,
who still lay where he had fallen. It tore into the helpless Heldane, ripping
his scalp, rending the flesh off his back.
With a guttural cry, I ran at it, caught it behind the ear with my scythe,
and pulled. The curved blade hooked into the meat and I succeeded in
yanking its head back for a second. Then a well-aimed bottle struck me on
the side of the head and knocked me over. I lost my grip on the scythe.
The creature turned, leaving Heldane a mangled wreck, face down in the
bloody soil. I scrambled back, kicking at it.
‘Eisenhorn!’ Bequin yelled, running forward on the other side. She threw
her knife over the creature’s back and I caught it neatly. Disturbed by her
cry, the beast swung about and lashed at her, tearing the wicker shield into
hanks of raffia and knocking her down.
I threw myself astride its back and thumped the dagger down repeatedly
into its neck. The dagger barely seemed to bite into the thick hide.
It writhed, trying to throw me off. I saw the scythe dangling from its
scalp behind the ear, grabbed it, and hooked the blade under its spiked
collar.
The creature was frenzied now, pulling hard at its chain. I pushed the
tooth of the dagger in through a link in the chain and down into its shoulder
blade, then levered the weapon over with all the force I could muster.
The link twisted open. The chain parted.
The carnodon ran forward a few paces, bellowed, and lunged.
Effortlessly, it leapt up the side of the pit into the shrieking crowd. I was
still attached to it by the scythe, the handle of which I clutched frantically.
As we landed in the seating, I was thrown clear, and crashed down onto the
frantic fleeing audience.
The beast was berserk. It tore into the crowd, hurling limp, mangled
forms and gouts of blood into the air. The pandemonium shook the dome.
I got up, pushing away the individuals who fell and stumbled into me in
their efforts to escape. Gunfire ripped out across the amphitheatre. In the
higher stands, I could see the militia scrambling down, firing at the
carnodon as Terronce and other men hustled towards the safety of a side
exit. The militia’s shots were hitting people in the crowd.
I jumped across the backs of several seats, and punched aside two
servants who grabbed at me. On the steps of the seating tiers just above me,
two household guards ran down, raising their autoguns to shoot at the
creature loose in the crowd.
I felled one with a psychic lance powered by rage and adrenaline, and
snatched his weapon from his hands. Before his companion could turn, I
had blown him down the steps and over the rail into the pit with a short
burst of gunfire.
I looked up at the seating where the Glaw nobles and their guests had
been. Lord Glaw, Locke and the pipe-smoker had already disappeared and
the guards were half-carrying Lady Fabrina and the ecclesiarch away. But
Urisel Glaw was still there, bellowing at his men over the bloody tumult.
He saw me.
‘The Inquisition will show you no mercy,’ I yelled at him, though I
doubted he could hear.
Urisel stared down at me for a moment, then shouted some more oath-
laden orders and turned his attention to the carnodon. It had ploughed
beyond the common seating now and was disembowelling a member of the
house militia. Multiple bloody gunshot wounds showed in its striped pelt.
Urisel snatched a hunting rifle that one of the men fetched for him. He
took careful aim at the carnodon and fired.
The massive weapon roared and the huge bulk of the creature flipped
over, its chest blasted open. Its falling bulk crushed the legs of a guard.
The crowd continued to flee, but the uproar decreased enough for me to
notice that a series of bells had begun to ring. Metal bells, electrically
triggered. From deeper in the vast mansion, other alarms sounded. Urisel
lowered his rifle and gestured to some of his men to discover the meaning
of the alarm. Those in the crowd not too far intoxicated or mindless with
fear looked anxiously around.
There were distant, inexplicable sounds. I didn’t wonder much about
them. Urisel took aim again, at me this time.
I dived over and a section of wooden seats exploded.
I clambered up. Urisel was reloading the wide-bore hunting iron, and
Terronce was heading down towards me, followed by other men.
Terronce fired. I aimed high and blew his head and his plumed silver
helmet apart with another tight burst.
Urisel was about to fire again. He drew the hunting piece to his shoulder
and found me in the crowd.
There was an abrupt, sizzling series of buzzing shots from somewhere
behind me. Three of the militia guards at the pit rail juddered and fell, and
Urisel Glaw was thrown backwards, his hunting rifle roaring as it fired
wildly up into the dome. The crowd began to mob frantically again in a
second, and the remaining soldiers swung their aim up, hunting for this new
shooter.
I swept around and saw him at once. Midas Betancore, crouched up on
the tiled slope of awning above the pit seating on the opposite side of the
arena. His needle guns, one clutched in each hand, spat again, peppering the
front stands with lethal shots. Members of the household and several more
guards tumbled. One guard pitched over the rail and fell into the pit. Further
along the front rail, the crowd’s panic to get clear of the carnage turned into
a stampede. The rail snapped and half a dozen pages and kitchen staff
spilled down the side of the pit wall. One clung to a broken rail-end for a
second before sliding off and dropping.
The remaining guards had found Midas now, and were firing up at the
tiled awning with their autoguns. Tile chips exploded out in a haze of dust,
but Midas was moving, sure-footed, along the terracotta shelf. Holstering
his weapons, he slid down its length, grabbed the edge with both hands and
executed a superb swing that carried him round and under the lip and into
the emptying stands.
The guards tracked him, firing wildly, cutting down members of the
screaming crowd.
I ran down to the rail. ‘Cover! Cover!’ I yelled down to Bequin and
Aemos below. They were busy trying to drag Heldane’s bloody form to the
comparative safety of the pit wall. I ran to the nearby body of a guard and
grabbed some more magazine clips from his harness.
A few shots whipped my way, but most were aimed across the pit at
Midas. I took cover behind some seats and some of the carnodon’s victims,
and opened fire up at the stands, aiming short bursts at the militia. Return
fire chopped my way and gobbets of wood and flesh sprayed up from my
makeshift cover. Midas was moving again, his guns buzzing.
The alarms were still ringing, and now, behind them and the frenzy of the
fleeing crowd, I could hear gunfire and the dull rumble of explosions.
Most of the arena had emptied now, except for the last handful of house
guards trading gunfire across the pit with the stealthy Midas. The sounds of
explosive fighting outside in the grounds and house were getting ever
louder.
I reached the banks of seats where the masters of the house had sat. The
Glaws and their honoured guests were now long gone. Urisel’s hunting rifle
lay on the ground, and blood flecked the seat. Midas had at least winged
him with a needle round.
I pushed past the end of the seats and down into the stairwell, the auto-
gun braced at my hip. The bodies of two staff members trampled in the
press lay broken there.
Urisel Glaw had not gone far, bleeding badly from his shoulder wound.
He heard me coming and staggered around, firing a small stub-pistol down
the gloomy tunnel. Then he disappeared from view.
Gun-butt raised under my arm, I moved forward, searching the darkness
of the dank stone tunnel. An opening to the left looked down into a stairwell
that entered the cell bay below. To the right was a hatch that allowed access
to the main house.
I pushed the hatch open with the barrel of the autogun.
Urisel came out of the cell-bay stairway, howling, and slammed into me
from behind.
I hit the door frame face first, and the autogun fired off three shots as it
twisted out of my grip.
Without even trying to turn, I doubled over and reached behind me,
grabbing a fold of dress uniform cloth, and jerked Urisel Glaw around into
the wall. He cried out.
I threw a left-handed punch that sent him reeling, then a right that
smashed his teeth. He enveloped me in a bear hug and we stumbled back a
few paces before I braced, kicked his legs out and jabbed a knuckle punch
into his sternum.
The fight seemed to be out of him. I choked him with a clawing hand and
cracked his skull back against the tunnel wall.
‘There will be no redemption for you, sinner,’ I spat into his bloody face,
‘or your foul house! Use your last breaths wisely and unfold your truths to
me, or the Inquisition will teach you pain that Gorgone Locke has yet to
imagine!’
‘You—’ he gurgled through blood and spittle and flecks of shattered
teeth, ‘you cannot even begin to imagine the Imperial misery House Glaw
will wreak. Our power is too great. We will pitch the bastard Emperor from
his golden throne and make him grovel and feed upon excrement. The
worlds of the Imperium will blister and burn before Oberon and Pontius.
Exalted will be the Great Darkness of Slaanesh—’
I cared little for his heretical ramblings, but the mention of that daemon-
blasphemy turned my stomach and chilled my heart. I knocked him down,
and looked around for something with which to bind his wrists.
Beyond the tunnel, the House of Glaw shook as if caught in a war zone.
MIDAS BETANCORE APPEARED at the mouth of the tunnel, and saw me
lashing Urisel Glaw to a heating pipe with lengths of awning cord. He
holstered his needle pistols and walked down to join me. I heard him
activate his vox-link and report his position. A curt response crackled back.
‘What’s going on?’ I asked him.
‘A Battlefleet Scarus naval action,’ he replied smugly.
HE’D BEEN OUT in the dark when Glaw’s men came to seize Aemos,
Bequin and Heldane. I was, by then, two hours overdue, and he’d slipped
away from our apartment to look for signs of me. The militia had fanned
out through the estate searching for him, but Midas was the sort of man who
wouldn’t be found if he didn’t want it to happen. He had avoided the
hunting parties, broke into the house’s communication annexe and sent a
brief but comprehensive report in code directly to Commodus Voke in
Dorsay.
Voke’s response had been immediate and authoritarian. The Glaw family
had forcibly detained a servant of the Imperial Inquisition and his
associates. That was all the excuse Voke had needed.
His demands, which brooked no refusal, swept clean over the heads of
Fleet Admiral Spatian and his officio, and went straight to the Lord Militant
Commander himself. The Lord Militant had mobilised a detachment of
naval security troopers into Voke’s remit within half an hour.
As an inquisitor, I know I have the right and authority to demand such
supportive responses myself, even from a Lord High Militant. And I have
done, on a very few occasions. But I was still impressed by the respect and
fear the old inquisitor conjured in men of such supreme rank.
A confident move like this was characteristic of Voke, characteristic of
his crushing, heavy methods. He’d wanted the slightest reason to come
down upon House Glaw with the proverbial wrath of Macharius, and I had
given it to him.
My capture, at least. Part of me was certain this show of influence and
authority was Commodus Voke’s way of establishing himself as alpha male,
inquisitorially speaking.
I didn’t care. I was glad of it, in truth. The bloodshed in the arena might
have broken us out, but without the assault, we’d have never made it out of
the Glaw estate and the clutches of the militia alive.
The operation was coded ‘Pacification 505’, 505 being the topographical
signifier for House Glaw. The troops had run in before dawn in four
armoured dropships, hugging the rolling terrain of the inland bluffs to avoid
the more than competent sensor system of House Glaw.
The ships held off behind the neighbouring hills as the sun rose, about the
time we were languishing in the cell, to allow a forward team of naval
security troopers to ran ahead on foot and cut holes, electronically, in the
perimeter defences of the great house. By then, they were in range of
Betancore’s personal vox set, and he had fed them logistic information and
an insider’s view of the militia’s deployment.
At approximately the same moment when the first carnodon had lunged
up out of its trap, the dropships had spurred forward from behind a long
finger of copse and came powering up the vale towards the house. The
Imperial Light Intruder Frigate Defence of Stalinvast, retasked by Admiral
Spatian on the Lord Militant’s instruction to hold geosynchronous orbit
above target/Glaw/505, had obliterated the launch hangars behind the yard
with pinpoint strikes from its lance batteries.
Two dropships, rocketing smoke charges and antipersonnel grenades, had
settled in front of the main house, blowing out all the windows. Forty black-
armoured troopers from naval security had then made an assault landing
and struck at the main facade. Bewildered, more than seventy men of the
house militia had attempted to repel them.
The other two dropships circled behind the house and spilled their troops
into a landing yard still lit by the blazing ruins of the launch block. Within
three minutes a running gun battle was shuddering down the halls and
corridors of House Glaw. The alarms were ringing soundly by then.
House Glaw owned close on four hundred fighting men in its retinue, not
to mention another nine hundred staff, many of whom took up weapons.
Glaw Militia were all trained men, veterans, well armoured in green
ballistic cloth and silver helmets, well equipped with autoguns, heavy
stubbers and grenades. An army, by most standards. I know more than one
commander in the Imperial Guard who has taken cities, whole planets
indeed, with such a number. And they had the advantage of home soil. They
knew the layout, the strengths, the weaknesses, of the old estate.
Naval security took them apart. The elite of Battlefleet Scarus, armed
with matt-black hell-guns and iron discipline, they conquered and purged
the great house room by room.
Some pockets of resistance were heavy. The troopers lost three men in a
virtually point blank firefight around the kitchen area. A suicide run by two
Glaw soldiers laden with tube charges vaporised another four and took
twenty metres off the end of the east wing.
Twenty-two minutes after the assault began, the militia had lost nearly
three hundred men.
Numerous householders and low-ranking staff fled into the woods and
valleys behind the house. A few made good their escape. Most were
rounded up, and more than thirty killed by the tightening circle of Imperial
Guard cordoning the estate. These men, two thousand of them, were
recruits from the founding, Gudrunite riflemen roused from the barracks
and shipped inland to experience a surprise taste of combat before ever
leaving their birthworld.
The bloody resistance of the Glaw militia was mainly intended to give
their nobles time to flee. The Glaws’ off-world cousin and his retinue were
cornered by the Gudrunite Rifles on the back path behind the house,
arrested, and then massacred when they tried to fight their way out. Other
traders and guests from the dinner surrendered to the enclosing forces.
Several orbital craft broke from the tree cover behind the main attack,
launching from secret hangars in the woods behind the house. One was
hammered out of the air by a trooper with a rocket launcher. Another two
made it five kilometres down the valley before they were incinerated from
above by the watchful Defence of Stalinvast.
Another, a fast and heavily armoured model, evaded the cover sweep and
headed west. The Defence of Stalinvast launched a trio of fighters after it,
and they eventually brought it down in the open sea after a lengthy chase.
Only weeks of forensic recovery might reveal who had been aboard any of
those craft, and there was no guarantee that an answer would be
forthcoming even then. Smart money was on the likes of Lord Glaw, Lady
Fabrina, Gorgone Locke, Dazzo the Ecclesiarch and the nameless pipe-
smoking man. Certainly, none of those persons were among the anguished
scum rounded up by the guard or by naval security.
Ninety minutes after it had begun, Pacification 505 was signalled as
‘achieved’ by Major Joam Joakells of naval security.
Only then did the launch carrying Commodus Voke move in.
TWELVE
In the ruins of the great house.
Murmurings.
Uprising.
IT WAS NOON, but the night storm had persisted, and the fitful rain washed
the colour out of the sky and doused the burning sections of House Glaw. A
terrible, blackened ruin, it stood on the hilltop, its windows burned out, its
roofs ragged, tiled lengths of beam, billowing grey and white smoke.
I sat in the yard, leaning back against the mudguard of an Imperial Guard
troop carrier, sipping occasionally from a cut-glass decanter of amasec. My
head was bowed. I needed medical attention and painkillers, a psychic
restorative, a good meal, neural surgery to the hundreds of wounds Locke
had inflicted, a bath, clean clothes...
More than anything else, I needed a bed.
Troops marched past, crunching their boots in time on the wet stone.
Orders sang back and forth. Occasionally, a fighter ship made a pass
overhead and vibrated my diaphragm with the throb of its afterburner.
My head swam. Fragments gathered and conflated in my unconscious
and spilled over. Each time, I shook myself awake. The blank-eyed man
was there, in the back of my head. I didn’t want to think about him, and saw
no place in this event for him, but his image lingered. Once, I was certain,
he was standing across the yard from me, by the scullery door, smiling at
me. I blinked him away.
I was still caked in blood, sweat and filth. Pain and fatigue clung to me
like a shroud. A corporal from the naval security detail had recovered our
confiscated possessions from Urisel Glaw’s apartment, and I had pulled on
a shirt and my button-sleeved leather coat. The trooper had handed me my
inquisitorial rosette, and I clutched it now, like a totem.
Eager men of the 50th Gudrunite Rifles jostled Glaw House staff through
the yard. The prisoners had their hands behind their heads, and some were
weeping.
Somebody slid down next to me on the cold flagstones and leaned back
against the greasy track assembly of the carrier.
‘Long night,’ Midas said.
I passed the decanter to him, and he took a long swig.
‘Where’s Aemos? The girl?’
‘Last I saw, the savant was bustling around somewhere, making notes. I
haven’t seen Alizabeth since we freed them from the pit.’
I nodded.
‘You’re half-dead, Gregor. Let me call up a launch and get you to
Dorsay.’
‘We’re not done here,’ I said.
Procurator Madorthene saluted me as he approached. He wasn’t wearing
his starchy white dress uniform now. In the coal-black armour of naval
security, he looked bigger and more commanding.
‘We’ve made a body exam,’ he said.
‘Oberon Glaw?’
‘No trace.’
‘Gorgone Locke? The churchman Dazzo?’
He shook his head.
I offered him the decanter with a sigh. To my surprise, he took it, sat
down with us and drank a mouthful.
‘They’re all probably cinders in the craft that tried to escape,’ he said.
‘But I’ll tell you this. Before it torched the two boats running the valley, the
Defence of Stalinvast was sure it read no life signs.’
‘Decoys,’ said Betancore.
‘The Glavian is right, for my money,’ he said. Then he shrugged. ‘But
good armour can rob away signals. We may never know.’
‘We’ll know, Madorthene,’ I promised him.
He took another tug on the decanter, handed it back to me and rose,
brushing down his seamless armour.
‘I’m glad naval security could serve you here, Inquisitor Eisenhorn. I
hope it’s restored your faith in the battlefleet.’
I looked up at him with a weak nod. ‘I’m impressed you came to oversee
yourself, procurator.’
‘Are you kidding? After what happened on the Essene, the admiral would
have had my head!’
He walked away. I liked him. An honest man doing his best amid the
conflicting political interests of battlefleet command and the Inquisition. In
later years, I would come to value Olm Madorthene’s honesty and
discretion immeasurably.
A fragile hunched figure clomped across the yard and stood over me.
‘Now whose methods seem wise?’ Commodus Voke asked, with a sneer.
‘You tell me,’ I replied, getting up.
VOKE HAD BROUGHT a staff of nearly fifty with him, all clad in black
robes, many with augmetic implants. They stripped the noble house of
every shred of evidence they could find. Crates of papers, books, slates,
artefacts and pict-tiles were carried out to waiting transports.
I was in no mood to argue. Pain and fatigue made my senses swim. Let
Voke use his vast retinue and resources to do the painstaking work of
recovery.
‘Much has been deleted, dumped or burned,’ a dour-faced savant called
Klysis reported to Voke, as I walked with my fellow inquisitor into the
shattered house. ‘Much else is encrypted.’
We progressed into the basement system, and I led Voke to the force-
shielded chamber where Glaw had trapped me. Kowitz’s blood still marked
the floor. The artefact from the altar plinth was gone.
‘He referred to it as the Pontius,’ I told Voke. The room no longer
showed signs of being psychically shielded, so logic said the psyker-effects
had been generated by the Pontius itself. As had the mental attack that had
felled me, I was sure.
I leaned against the chamber wall and patiently told Voke the key points I
had learned. ‘Eyclone’s mission to Hubris, involving the Pontius, was
clearly important to them, but Oberon Glaw told me explicitly that said
endeavour had been aborted... cancelled because something more vital had
come into play. They referred to it as the true matter.’
‘It would explain why your foe Eyclone was abandoned,’ he mused.
‘After all his preparations, the Glaws failed to deliver the Pontius as they
had promised.’
‘That fits. Dazzo and the shipmaster Locke were clearly deeply involved
in this true matter. We need to establish more facts about them. I’m certain
the work that concerned them touched on some archeoxenon material. They
mentioned the “saruthi”.’
‘A xenos breed, outlying the sub-sector,’ said Voke’s savant. ‘Little is
known of them and contact is forbidden. The Inquisition holds several
investigations pending, but their space is uncharted, and while they keep
themselves to themselves, more urgent matters have caused investigations
to be postponed.’
‘But a rogue like Locke may well have established lines of contact with
them.’
Klysis and Voke both nodded. ‘It will bear further research,’ Voke said.
‘Ordo Xenos must begin a survey of the saruthi. But for now, the matter is
closed.’
‘How do you reason that?’ I asked with a contemptuous laugh.
Voke fixed me with his beady eyes. ‘House Glaw is destroyed, its
principal members and co-conspirators are slain. With them are lost the
items precious to their cause. Whatever they were planning is finished.’
I didn’t even begin to argue with the old man. Voke was sure of his facts.
His main failing, in my opinion.
HE WAS WRONG, of course. The first hint came ten days later. I had
returned to Dorsay with my colleagues, and had spent some time in the care
of the Imperial Hospice on the Grand Canal where my many wounds and
injuries were treated. Most of the cuts and gashes were superficial, and
would heal in time. Locke’s work on me had left deeper scars. Multiple
neural injuries afflicted my system, many of which would never repair.
Augmeticists from the battlefleet’s Officio Medicalis conducted
microsurgery on shredded nerve transmitters in my spine, thorax, brainstem
and throat. They implanted more than sixty sections of artificial nerve fibre
and ganglions. I had lost a good deal of sensitivity in my palette and
oesophagus, and the reflexes on the left side of my body were dulled. My
face they could do nothing with. Neural systems there had been utterly
scourged. Locke’s promise had been lasting. I would never smile again, nor
make much of any expression. My face, impassive, was now just a mask of
flesh.
Aemos visited me every day, and brought more and more data-slates and
old books to my private room in the Hospice. He had established a working
relationship with Voke’s savants (Klysis was but one of seventeen employed
by Commodus Voke), and was sifting data as it was passed to him. We tried
to source information concerning the Glaws’ confederates, but there was
damnably little, even with Voke’s platoon of savants hard at work. Locke
was a shadowy, almost mythical figure, his name and reputation well
known throughout the Helican sub-sector, but nothing could be found about
his origin, career, associates or even the name of his vessel. Dazzo also
drew a blank.
The Ecclesiarchy had no record of a churchman of that name. But I
remembered what Kowitz had told me during the banquet, that Dazzo had
links to a missionary order sponsored by the Glaws on the edgeworld
Damask. Damask was a real place, right enough, a harsh frontier planet at
the very limit of the Helican sub-sector territory, one of a hundred
worthless, seldom-visited places. Astrogeographically it lay just a few
months passage spinward of the uncharted regions of the mysterious
saruthi.
Lowink accompanied Aemos on one of his visits as soon as I was strong
enough, and extracted from my mind a likeness of the pipe-smoking man,
which he realised psychometrically on an unexposed pict-plate. The image,
a little blurred, was good enough, and it was copied and circulated through
all branches of the investigating authorities. But no one could identify him.
Lowink recovered an image of the Pontius too, by the same means. This
baffled all who viewed it, except Aemos who immediately confirmed that
the strange artefact was precisely the correct size and dimensions to fit into
the cavity in Eyclone’s casket, the one recovered from Processional Two-
Twelve. As we had conjectured, this was what Eyclone had been awaiting,
what the mass-murder in the Hubris ice tomb had been for.
‘Urisel Glaw referred to Pontius as if he was still alive,’ I said to Aemos.
‘Certainly something with great psychic force felled me in the chamber
where the Pontius was secured. Could he be alive, in some sense, some part
of him, perhaps some psychic essence, captured in that device?’
Aemos nodded. ‘It is not beyond the highest Imperial technologies to
maintain a sentience after great physical injury or even death. But for such
technologies to be within the grasp of even a mighty family like the
Glaws...’
‘You told me it resembled something of the mysteries of the Adeptes
Mechanicus.’
‘I did,’ he pondered. ‘It is most perturbatory. Could the foul crime of
Hubris have been some effort to siphon vulnerable life energies into this
artefact? To give the Pontius a massive jolt of power?’
ON THE THIRD morning, Fischig visited. His own injuries were healed,
and he seemed annoyed to have missed the episode at Glaw House. He
brought with him a priceless antique slate, a collection of inspirational verse
composed by Juris Sathascine, curate-confessor of one of Macharius’s
generals. It was a gift from Maxilla, from his private collection.
Delayed by the excitement of the Glaw incident, the founding resumed.
The new Imperial guardsmen were shipped to troop transports in the
orbiting fleet and the final ceremonies were carried out. The Lord Militant
Commander was now anxious to begin his expedition into the troubled
Ophidian sub-sector, and felt enough time and manpower had been spent on
this little local matter.
On the tenth day, it didn’t look so much like a local matter any more. Via
astropathic link, news came of incidents throughout the sub-sector: a rash of
bombings on Thracian Primaris; the seizure and destruction of a passenger
vessel bound for Hesperus; a hive decimated by a viral toxin on Messina.
That evening, a brief, bright star suddenly ignited in the sky over Dorsay.
The Ultima Victrix, a four hundred thousand tonne ironclad, had exploded
at anchor. The blast had crippled four ships nearby.
An hour later, it became clear the incident had grown signally worse.
Exactly how was not clear, even to battlefleet intelligence, but the explosion
had been identified in error as a sign of an enemy attack by several
components of the fleet. A frigate wing commanded by a captain called
Estrum had moved to engage, and several destroyers from the advance
phalanx had mistaken them for fleet intruders and opened fire. For twenty-
seven hideous minutes, Battlefleet Scarus waged war against itself through
the anchor lines of navy vessels and troop ships. Six ships were lost.
Eventually, apparently heedless of countermands, Estrum broke off and,
with a mobile group of fifteen vessels, went to warp to outrun ‘the enemy’.
Admiral Spatian gave chase with a flotilla of eight heavy cruisers.
The remaining fleet elements straggled to regain control and handle the
wanton destruction.
The Lord High Militant, I learned, had a fit of rage so extreme he had to
be sedated by his private physician.
‘THAT DOESN’T JUST happen,’ Betancore said. We sat in my private room,
by the tall windows, looking out across the city. Ghost-flares of energy and
explosion, one trailing down in the sky like a falling star, marked the night.
‘Imperial battlefleets are among the most ordered and disciplined
organisations in space. Confusion like that doesn’t just happen.’
‘Like deserters don’t just get a hold of a ship and uniforms and know the
name of the man whose ship they chance to board, you mean? Our unseen
foe is making his influence felt. Voke talked about a parent cult, overseeing
many small cells and cabals. He reckoned the Glaws were the masters of
this conspiracy. I’m not so sure. There could be a yet higher authority at
work.’
URISEL GLAW WAS held in the Imperial Basilica. He had undergone hours
of intense interrogation and torture since his capture. And he had given up
nothing.
I went to him that night. Voke and his interrogators were still at work,
now with a sense of urgency.
They held him in what could only be described as a dungeon, ninety
metres below the massive grey stone fortress. All the other prisoners taken
during the raid on House Glaw were sequestered here too. In order to
contain and interrogate them all, Voke had co-opted local Arbites, soldiers
of the Gudrun standing army, and officials of the Ministorium. They
worked in concert with his own extensive staff.
Arriving by air launch, I was met by a tall, grey-haired man in a long
maroon coat attended by two armed servitors. I knew him at once.
Inquisitor Titus Endor and I were of similar ages and had both studied
under Hapshant.
‘You are recovered, Gregor?’ he asked, shaking my hand.
‘Well enough to continue my work. I didn’t expect to see you here,
Titus.’
‘Voke’s reports on the Glaw case have concerned our order’s sub-sector
officio. Lord Inquisitor Rorken has declared the need for a full disclosure.
Voke’s inability to get anything out of Urisel Glaw has annoyed him. I’ve
been diverted to assist. And not just me. Schongard is here too, and Molitor
is on his way.’
I sighed. Endor, a fellow Amalathian, I could work with, though there is
a proverb about too many inquisitors. Schongard was a rabid
monodominant, and a liability in my view, and Konrad Molitor was the sort
of radical I felt had no place in the order at all.
‘This is unusual,’ I said.
‘It’s all down to connections,’ Endor remarked. ‘What has come to light
through your work here, and Voke’s, is a massive puzzle that itself connects
dozens of separate cases and investigations. I burned a heretic on Mariam
two weeks ago, and in his effects found documents linking him to the
Glaws. Schongard is pursuing blasphemous texts that he is certain first
came into the sub-sector in the cargoes of Guild Sinesias traders. Molitor...
well, who knows what he’s doing, but it no doubt connects.’
‘Sometimes,’ I told him, ‘I think we work against each other. This comes
out and, look! We all hold pieces to the same mystery. How might we have
taken this enemy and his structure apart a month ago, two months, if we had
exchanged information?’
Endor laughed. ‘Are you questioning the working practices of the most
lauded Inquisition, Gregor? Working practices laid down centuries ago? Are
you questioning the motives of fellow members of our convocation?’
I knew he was joking, but my manner remained serious. ‘I’m decrying a
system where we don’t even trust each other.’
We descended, under escort, into the depths of the prison block.
‘What of Glaw?’
‘Gives up nothing,’ said Endor. ‘What he’s endured so far would have
broken and cracked most men, or at least had them begging for death or
trying to kill themselves. He persists, almost in good humour, almost
arrogant, as if he expects to live.’
‘He’s right. We’ll never sign his death notice while he has secrets.’
Voke’s men were at work on Glaw in a foul-smelling, red-painted cell.
Glaw was a ruin, kept alive by expertise that matched the skill used to
torture him.
To unlock an answer from the mind of the heretic is the greatest duty of
an inquisitor, and I will not shrink from any means, but this way was futile.
Left to me, the physical torture would have stopped days before. One look
showed that Urisel Glaw was resolved not to talk.
I would have left him alone, for weeks perhaps. Despite his agonies, our
constant attention betrayed our desperation, and that gave him all the
strength he needed to endure. Silence and isolation would have broken him.
Inquisitor Schongard stepped back from the table where Glaw was
strapped and pulled off soiled surgical gloves. He was a broad man with
thin brown hair and a chilling mask of black metal surgically fixed to his
face. No one knew if this mask covered some grievous injury or was simply
an affectation. Dark, unhealthy, bloodshot eyes regarded Endor and myself
through the oblong slits in the metal.
‘Brothers,’ he whispered. His phlegmy voice never wavered from that
low, hushed level. ‘His resistance is quite the doughtiest I have seen. Voke
and I agree that some monumental work has been done to his mind,
allowing him to block out the manipulations. Psychic probes have been
tried, but found wanting.’
‘Perhaps we should have the Astropathicus provide us with one of their
primary class adepts,’ said Voke from behind me.
‘I don’t think there’s a mind block there at all,’ I said. ‘You would see
traces of the conditioning. He’d most likely be screaming for us to stop now
because he knows he cannot tell us the answer.’
‘Nonsense,’ whispered Schongard. ‘No raw mind could withstand this.’
‘I sometimes doubt whether my fellows know anything about human
nature at all,’ I said, mildly. ‘This man is a fiend. This man is nobility. He
has seen into the darkness we so fear, and he knows what power feels like.
The promise of what lies at stake for him and his collaborators is enough to
steel him.’
I crossed to the table and looked down into Glaw’s lidless eyes. Blood
bubbled at his flayed lips as he smiled at me.
‘He promised the overthrow of worlds, the annihilation of billions. He
boasted of it. What the Glaws are after is so great, that none of this matters.
Isn’t that right, Urisel?’
He gurgled.
‘This is just a hardship,’ I said, turning away from the heretic in disdain.
‘He keeps going because he knows that what awaits him will make this all
worthwhile.’
Voke snorted. ‘What could be so?’
‘Eisenhorn sounds convincing to me,’ said Endor. ‘Glaw will protect his
secrets no matter what we do, for those secrets will repay him a thousand
fold.’
Schongard’s masked face shook dubiously. ‘I am with brother Voke.
What reward could be worth the prolonged ministrations of the Inquisition’s
finest fleshsmiths?’
I didn’t answer. I didn’t know the answer, in truth, but I had some notion
of the scale.
And the thought of it froze my soul.
IF I HAD harboured any doubts that the Glaws’ authority had survived,
they were dispelled in the course of the next week. Campaigns of explosive,
toxic and psychic sabotage plagued the worlds of the sub-sector, as if all the
secret, dark cells of evil hidden away within Imperial society were
revealing themselves, risking discovery as they turned on their local
populations, as if orchestrated by some ruling power. The likes of Lord
Glaw and his accomplices had either escaped destruction or they were but
part of an invisible ruling elite that now mobilised all the hidden offspring
cabals on a double-dozen worlds into revolt.
‘There is another explanation,’ Titus Endor said to me as we attended
mass in the Imperial Cathedral of Dorsay. ‘For all their power and
influence, the Glaws were not the summit of their conspiratorial pyramid.
There were yet others above them.’
It was possible, but I had seen the Glaws’ arrogance first hand. They
were not ones to bow to another master. Not a human master, anyway.
The unrest had broken out on Gudrun too by then. A bombing campaign
had stricken one town in the south, and an agricultural settlement in the
west had been exterminated by a neural toxin released into its water supply.
Battlefleet Scarus was still struggling to recover from the self-inflicted blow
against it, and Admiral Spatian had returned from his mission to reassemble
the panicked fleet units empty handed. Captain Estrum’s mobile group had
simply vanished. I had exchanged messages with Madorthene, who told me
that no one in battlefleet command now doubted that the destruction of the
Ultima Victrix and the subsequent mayhem had been anything other than
sabotage. Our enemy’s reach extended into the battlefleet itself.
Then two massive hives of Thracian Primaris rose in open revolt.
Thousands of workers, tainted by the corrupt touch of Chaos, took to the
streets, burning, looting and executing. They displayed the obscene badges
of Chaos openly.
The Lord Militant’s plans for a crusade into the Ophidian sub-sector were
now indefinitely postponed. Battlefleet Scarus left anchor and made best
speed to suppress the Thracian uprising.
But that was only the first. Open revolt exploded through the suburbs of
Sameter’s capital city and, a day later, a civil war erupted on Hesperus. In
both cases, the stain of Chaos was there.
This miserable, shocking period is referred to in Imperial histories as the
Helican Schism. It lasted eight months, and millions died in open warfare
across those three worlds, not to mention hundreds of lesser incidents on
other planets, including Gudrun. The Lord Militant got his holy crusade,
though I am sure he hardly expected to be waging it against the population
of his own sub-sector.
The authorities, and even my worthy fellow inquisitors, seemed stunned
to the point of inactivity by this unprecedented outbreak. The archenemy of
mankind often acted openly and brutally, but this seemed to defy logic.
Why, after what may have been centuries of careful, secret establishment,
had the hidden cults risen as one, exposing themselves to the wrath of the
Imperial military?
I believed the answer was the ‘true matter’. Urisel Glaw’s almost gleeful
resistance to our methods convinced me. The archenemy was embarked
upon something so momentous that it was prepared to sacrifice all of its
secret forces throughout the sub-sector to keep the Imperium occupied.
I believed, with all conviction, that it would be better for planets to burn
than for that ‘true matter’ to be accomplished.
Which is why I went to Damask.
THIRTEEN
Damask.
North Qualm.
Sanctum.
UNDER A LEADEN, rusty sky, the ball-tree forests followed the wind.
They looked like thick herds of bulbous livestock, surging across the
rolling sweeps of scree, and the jostling, clattering noise they made sounded
like hooves.
But they were trees: pustular, fronded globes of cellulose swelled by
lighter-than-air gases generated from decomposition processes deep inside
them. They drifted in the wind and dragged heavy, trailing root systems
behind them. Occasionally, the pressure of one ball-tree against another
caused a gas-globe to vent with a moaning squeal forced out through
fibrous sphincters. Plumes of gas wafted above the tree herd.
I climbed to the top of a low plateau, where the bluish flint and gravel
were caked in yellowish lichens. A couple of solitary ball-trees, small
juveniles, scudded across the hill’s flat summit. In the centre of the
plateau’s top stood a rockcrete pylon marker, commemorating the original
landing place of the first settlers who had come to Damask. The elements
had all but worn away the inscription. Standing by the marker, I slowly
turned and took in the landscape. Black flint hills to the west, thick ball-tree
forests in the wide river valley to the north, leagues of thorn-woods to the
east, near to where we had set down, and grumbling, fire-topped volcanoes
to the south, far away, sooting the sky with threads of sulphurous brown
smoke. Clouds of small air-grazers circled over the forests, preparing to
roost for the night. A surly, scarred moon was rising, distorted by the thick
amber atmosphere.
‘Eisenhorn,’ Midas called over the vox.
I walked back down the plateau slope, buttoning my leather coat against
the evening breeze. Midas and Fischig waited by the landspeeder that they
had spent the past two hours unstowing and reassembling from the gun-
cutter’s hold. It was an old, unarmed model and it hadn’t been used for
three years. Midas was closing an engine cowling.
‘You’ve got it working, then,’ I said.
Midas shrugged. ‘It’s a piece of crap. I had to get Uclid to strip in new
relays. All manner of cabling had perished.’
Fischig looked particularly unimpressed with the vehicle.
I seldom had a use for it. On most worlds, local transport was available. I
hadn’t expected Damask to be so... unpopulated.
Records said there were at least five colony settlements, but there had
been no sign of any from orbit, and no response to vox or astropathical
messages. Had the human population of Damask withered and died in the
past five years since records were filed?
We’d left Aemos, Bequin and Lowink with the cutter, which had put
down on the shores of a wide river basin. We’d carefully disguised it with
camouflage netting. Midas had chosen a landing site within speeder range
of some of the colony locations, yet far enough out to avoid being seen by
anybody at those locations as we made descent. Tobias Maxilla awaited our
pleasure aboard the Essene in high orbit above.
Midas fired up the speeder’s misfiring engines and we moved off
overland from the hidden cutter towards the last recorded position of the
closest human settlement.
Tumble-brush scudded around the speeder, and we rode through scarp-
land where root-anchored trees spread aloft branches blistering with gas-
sacks so that the whole plant seemed to strain against the soil and gravity in
the wind. Grazers, little bat-like mammals with membranous wings,
fluttered around. Larger gliders, immense headless creatures that were all
flat wingspan and fluked tail, turned silently on the thermals high above us.
The landscape was jagged, broken and had the bluish cast of flint. The air
was dark and noxious, and we used rebreather masks from time to time.
We followed the frothy, brackish river waters for twenty kilometres and
then left the wide flood banks and juddered up through rocky scarps,
sculptural deserts formed by elementally shattered flint outcrops, brakes of
dusty yellow fern, and seas of lichen trembling in the gusting wind. The
ugly moon rose higher, though there was still daylight left.
Midas had to slew the speeder to a halt at one place where a group of
much larger grazers broke across the trail, panicked by the sound of the
engines. They were dove-grey giants with steep, humped backs, trunk-like
snouts and long attenuated legs ending in massive pads. Their legs seemed
too slender and long to support such bulks, but like the local plant life, I
suspected the swollen torsos of these animals contained supporting bladders
of gas.
They snorted and clattered away into the fern thickets. The speeder had
stalled. Midas got out and cussed at the rotors of the turbo-fan for a few
minutes until the mechanism chuckled back into life. As we waited, Fischig
and I stretched our legs. He climbed up onto an igneous boulder and fiddled
with the straps of his rebreather as he watched the hot blue streaks of a
meteor storm slice the gloomy sky on the western horizon.
I gazed across the fern thickets. Air-grazers chirruped and darted in the
hushing leaves. The wind had changed, and a forest-herd of ball-trees
scudded in through the edges of the ferns, squeaking and rasping as the
wind drove their globes and root-systems through the grounded plants.
We pushed on another ten kilometres, coming down into a rift valley
where the ground became thick, sedimentary soil, black and wet. The
vegetation here was richer and more rubbery; bulb snakelocks and bright,
spiky marsh lilies, clubmoss, horsetail, tousled maidenhair, lofty cycads
festooned with epiphytic bromeliads and skeins of ground-draping
gnetophytes. Clouds of tiny insects billowed in the damper glades and along
seeping watercourses, and large, hornet-like hunters with scintillating wings
buzzed through the damp air like jewelled daggers.
‘There,’ said Fischig, his eyes sharp. We stopped and dismounted. A
muddy expanse near the track had once been a cultivated field, and the
rusty carcasses of two tilling machines lay half-buried in the sucking soil.
A little further on, we passed a marker stone struck from flint. ‘Gillan’s
Acre’ it read in Low Gothic.
We’d passed the township itself before we realised, and turned back. It
was nothing but the stumps of a few walls covered with wispy weed-growth
and rampant gnetophytes. Until at least five years before, this had been a
community of eight hundred. A scan showed metal fragments and portions
of broken machinery buried under the soil.
Fischig found the marker screened by sticky cycads at the north end of
the town plot. It had been fashioned from local fibre-wood, a carved symbol
that was unmistakably one of the filthy and unnerving glyphs of Chaos.
‘A statement? A warning?’ Fischig wondered aloud.
‘Burn it immediately,’ I told him.
The vox-link warbled. It was Maxilla, from orbit.
‘I’ve been sectioning the landscape as you requested, inquisitor,’ he
reported. ‘The atmosphere is hindering my scans, but I’m getting there. I
just ran a sweep of the volcanic region south of you. It’s hard to tell because
it’s active, but I think there are signs of structures and operating machines.’
He pin-pointed the site to the speeder’s navigation system. Another
seventy kilometres, roughly the location of another possible settlement
listed on our maps.
‘That’s quite a distance, and the light is failing,’ Midas said. ‘Let’s get
back to the cutter. We’ll head south at dawn.’
IN THE NIGHT, as we slept, something approached the shrouded cutter and
set off the motion alarms. We went out, armed, to look for intruders, but
there was no sign. And no sign of drifting ball-trees either.
AT DAWN, WE headed south. The volcanic region, its smouldering peaks
rising before us, was thickly forested with fern and thorn-scrub. It was hot
too, as stinking, heated gas leaked into the glades from the volcanic vents
that laced the rocky earth. A half-hour into the sulphurous forests we were
sweating heavily and using our rebreathers almost constantly.
Below the peak of one of the largest cones, the landspeeder’s
rudimentary scanners detected signs of activity as we rode up a long slope
of tumbled, desiccated rock. Fischig, Midas and I dismounted from the
speeder and clambered up a flinty outcrop to get a better view with our
scopes.
In the shadow of the cone was a large settlement... old stone and wood-
built structures, mostly ruined, as well as newer, modular habitats made of
ceramite. There was machinery down there, generators and other heavy
systems at work under tarpaulin canopies. Tall, angled screens of reinforced
flak-board had been erected on scaffolding rigs to shield the place from ash-
fall. Three speeders and two heavy eight-wheelers were drawn up outside
the main habitat units. A few figures moved around the place, too distant to
resolve clearly.
‘The last survey showed no signs of active vulcanism in this region,’
Midas reminded me, echoing an observation Aemos had made on our
arrival.
‘See there,’ I said, indicating a portion of the settlement that ran into the
slope of the largest cone. ‘Those old buildings are partially buried in
solidified ash. The original settlement predates the activity.’
Midas pulled a map-slate from his pocket and whirred through the index.
‘North Qualm,’ he said. ‘One of the settler habitats, a mining town.’
We watched for fifteen or twenty minutes, long enough to feel the ground
shudder and see a gout of white hot liquid fire spit from one of the cones.
Alarms sounded in the settlement below, but were quickly stifled. A rain of
wet ash and glowing embers fluttered down across the township and settled
like black snow on the flak-board screens.
‘Why would they persist in working this site with the constant threat of
eruption?’ Fischig growled.
‘Let’s take a closer look,’ I suggested.
Covering the speeder with foliage, we set off down the forested valley.
The ground between the feathery ferns and hard, dry thorn-trees was thick
with fungal growth, some of it brightly covered and glossy. Though we
worked carefully, we couldn’t help kicking up puffs of spores and soredia.
I was wearing my button-sleeve black coat, Fischig his brown body
armour, his helmet hooked on his belt, and Midas wore his regular outfit,
though he had replaced his cerise jacket with a short, dark-blue work coat.
All of us melted into the forest shadows.
I still wasn’t sure why Fischig had come along. After Gudrun, the remit
given him by Lord Custodian Carpel seemed done with, but he had refused
to return to Hubris. It seemed he trusted my instinct that the matter was far
from done with.
We crossed a low stream bed, steaming with hot, pungent water that
bubbled up from the vents, and came silently up along the north edge of the
settlement. Now the judder of generators could be made out, the distant
growl of rock-drills. Guards in khaki drill fatigues worn under spiked and
blackened segments of metal body armour wandered the length of an
earthwork wall that had been banked up at the edge of the trees, running
great bull-cygnids on long chains. The canines were meaty brutes with
lolling tongues and beards of spittle. The guards that pulled on their chains
carried newly stamped, short-form lasguns on shoulder slings. Their faces
were masked behind heavy black rebreathers. Workgangs, some stripped to
their leggings in the heat, toiled to sluice the smouldering ash from the flak-
board screens with hoses and bucket chains.
Midas pointed out where the edges of the settlement had been ringed
with motion detectors and antipersonnel mines. All had been deactivated.
The constant tremors had rendered both useless as defences. But there was
no mistaking the aura I had felt since we had first begun to approach. A
psychic veil utterly enclosed North Qualm.
I took out my scope and played it around the settlement. More guards,
many more, and dozens of filth-caked workers, lounging by the entrance to
one particularly large modular shed. Several supervisors moved back and
forth among the resting work gangs, holding brief conversations and
making notations on data-slates. Eight workers emerged from the shed
carrying long, stretcher-like trays with high sides covered with clear-plastic
wraps. I zoomed the magnification of the scope to get a closer look at the
faces of the supervisors. I didn’t recognise any of them. They were all dour,
scholarly men in grey rainproof overalls.
Something vast suddenly crossed my field of vision. By the time I had
reacted and adjusted the magnification, it had passed out of sight into the
works shed. I had a brief memory of bright, almost gaudy metal and a
shimmering, flowing robe.
‘What the hell was that?’ I hissed.
Midas looked at me, lowering his scope, actual fear on his face. Fischig
also looked disturbed.
‘A giant, a horned giant in jewelled metal,’ Midas said. ‘He came striding
out of the modular hab to the left and went straight into the shed. God-
Emperor, but it was huge!’
Fischig agreed with a nod. ‘A monster,’ he said.
The cones above roared again, and a rain of withering ash fluttered down
across the settlement. We shrank back into the thorn-trees. Guard activity
seemed to increase.
‘Rosethorn,’ my vox piped.
‘Now is not a good time,’ I hissed.
It was Maxilla. He sent one final word and cut off. ‘Sanctum.’
‘Sanctum’ was a Glossia codeword that I had given Maxilla before we
had left the Essene. I wanted him in close orbit, providing us with
extraction cover and overhead sensor advantages, but knew that he would
have to melt away the moment any other traffic entered the system.
‘Sanctum’ meant that he had detected a ship or ships emerging from the
immaterium into realspace, and was withdrawing to a concealment orbit
behind the local star.
Which meant that all of us on the planet were on our own.
Midas caught my sleeve and pointed down at the settlement. The giant
had reappeared and stood in plain view at the mouth of the shed. He was
well over two metres tall, wrapped in a cloak that seemed to be made of
smoke and silk, and his ornately decorated armour and horned helmet were
a shocking mixture of chased gold, acidic yellow, glossy purple, and the red
of fresh, oxygenated blood. In his ancient armour, the monster looked like
he had stood immobile in that spot for a thousand years. Just a glance at
him inspired terror and revulsion, involuntary feelings of dread that I could
barely repress.
A Space Marine, from the corrupted and damned Astartes. A Chaos
Marine.
FOURTEEN
A tale of repression.
Rogue.
Return to the flame hills.
‘WE’VE NOT BEEN idle,’ Bequin told me with a smirk when we returned to
the gun-cutter. It was noon, and river basin was filling with bumping
clusters of ball-trees driven off the flint plains by the wind. They drifted
over the shingle and splashed trailing roots into the water.
Bequin was dressed in work fatigues, a rebreather slung around her neck,
and she carried an autopistol. As Midas and Fischig stowed the speeder
under the netting, she led me into the crew-bay and waved the weapon in
the direction of a thin, filthy man chained to a cargo-loop with cuff
restraints. His hair was matted and his clothes, an assemblage of patched
rags, were stiff with caked mud. He looked at me with fierce eyes through a
shaggy fringe of wet hair.
‘There were three of them, maybe more,’ Bequin told me. ‘Came to take
a look at us using the ball-trees as moving cover. The others fled, but I
brought him down.’
‘How?’ I asked.
She gave me that look which told me not to keep underestimating her.
‘Our intruders from last night?’ I wondered aloud. Bequin shrugged.
I walked over to face the captive. ‘What’s your name?’
‘He doesn’t say much,’ Bequin advised. I told her to move away.
‘Name?’ I asked again.
Nothing. I paused, collected my mind and then sent a gently probe into
the shady recesses of his skull.
‘Tymas Rhizor,’ he stammered.
Good. Another gentle push at his slowly yielding mind. The levels of fear
and caution were palpable.
‘Of Gillan His Acre, Goddes land.’
I switched to speech, without the psychic urge now. ‘Gillan’s Acre? You
mean Gillan’s Acre?’
‘Seythee Gillan His Acre?’
‘Gillan’s Acre?’
He nodded. ‘Theesey truth.’
‘Proto-Gothic, with generational nuance shift,’ Aemos said, coming near.
‘Damask was colonised something over five hundred years ago, and was
isolated for a lengthy period. The population may not have flourished, but
the language has perpetuated vestiges of older linguaforms.’
‘So this man is likely to be a native, a settler?’
Aemos nodded. I saw our captive was looking from my face to Aemos’s,
trying to follow our conversation.
‘You were born here, on Damask?’
He frowned.
‘Born here?’
‘Ayeam of Gillan His Acre. Yitt be Goddes land afoor the working.’
I looked round at Aemos. This would take forever. ‘I can manage,’
Aemos said. ‘Ask away.’
‘Ask him what happened to Gillan’s Acre.’
‘Preyathee, howcame bye lossen Gillan His Acre?’
His story was painfully simple, and shaped by the ignorance of a man
whose kind had worked the poor soil of a lonely edgeworld for generations.
The families, as he called them, presumably the clan groups of the original
settlers, had worked the land for as long as his memory and the memory of
his elders went. There were five farming communities, and two quarries or
mines, which provided building materials and fossil fuel in exchange for a
share of the crops. They were devout people, dedicated to the nurture of
‘Goddes land’... God’s land, though there was no doubt that by ‘God’ they
meant the God-Emperor. As little as four years ago, after the time of the last
survey from which records we worked, there had been upwards of nine
thousand settlers living in the communities of Damask.
Then the mission came. Rhizor reckoned this to have been three years
before. A ship brought a small order of ecclesiarchs here from Messina.
They intended to establish a retreat and spiritually educate the neglected
settlers. There had been thirty priests. He recognised the name Dazzo.
‘Archprieste Dazzo,’ he called him. Other off-worlders came too, not
priests like Dazzo and his brethren, but men who worked with them. From
the way he described them, they sounded like geological surveyors or
mining engineers. They concentrated their attentions on the quarries at
North Qualm. After about a year, the activity increased. More ships came
and went. Settlers, mostly strong males, were recruited from the farm
communities to work the mines, often brutally. The ecclesiarchs didn’t seem
to mind. As their populations drained, the farming settlements began to fail
and die off. No help was given to sustain them. A disease, probably an off-
world import, killed many. Then the volcanic activity began, suddenly,
without warning. Everyone in the farmsteads was rounded up and pressed
into service at the pits as if some great urgency was now driving the task.
Rhizor and many like him toiled until they dropped, and later managed to
escape, living like animals in the thorn forests.
So Dazzo and his mission had come to Damask, enslaved the population
into a workforce, and were now hell-bent on mining out something from the
territory around North Qualm. It seemed likely to me that the vulcanism had
been triggered by incautious mining work.
I reached into his mind again... he trembled in fear as he felt the psychic
touch... and showed him an image of Dazzo. Eagerly, he confirmed his
identity. Then Locke, another face he knew and regarded with ill-concealed
hatred. Locke had been chief among the men who had pressed the farmers
into service. His cruelty had left a lasting mark. I showed him the faces of
Urisel and Oberon Glaw, neither of which were known to him. At last, I
visualised an image of the pipe-smoking man.
‘Malahite,’ he announced, recognising him at once. According to Rhizor,
the obscura addict with the watery blue eyes was Girolamo Malahite, chief
of the surveyors and engineers.
Fischig, who had joined us during the conversation, asked about the
fibre-wood marker we had found at Gillan’s Acre. Rhizor wrinkled his face
with grief. That had marked the mass grave where the off-worlders had
buried all those who had resisted.
Midas called me to the cockpit. I told Aemos to feed Rhizor and question
him further.
MIDAS SAT IN the leather pilot’s throne, his lap draped with spools of
scroll paper stamped out of the electric press.
‘No wonder Maxilla hid,’ he said by way of an opening. ‘Look here.’
The scrolls were a transcription log of the astropathic and vox traffic
Midas had been able to monitor from the ships in orbit. He slid a gloved
finger down the jumbled columns of figures and text.
‘I make out at least twelve vessels up there, maybe more. It’s difficult to
say an accurate figure. These here, for example, may be two ships in dialog
or the same ship repeating itself.’
‘Coding?’
‘That’s the interesting bit. It’s all standard Imperial, the navy code called
Textcept.’
‘That’s common enough.’
He nodded. ‘And look here, the question and answer pattern indicates a
capital ship checking that its fleet components have all arrived in real-
space. It’s a typical Imperial structure. Military... one of ours.’
‘A friendly fleet.’
‘Not friendly, perhaps. Look at the command identifier here... that name
translates as Estrum.’
‘The missing captain.’
‘The missing captain... perhaps not that missing after all. Perhaps...
rogue. The whole incident at Gudrun anchorage, the mistaken recognition,
the “panic”... could have been an excuse to withdraw ships loyal to him.’
‘But he’s still broadcasting in standard Imperial code-form.’
‘If his officers alone are party to the deceit, he won’t want to alert the
crews.’
AN HOUR LATER, a large launch with fighter escort broke from the fleet
and swung down to the surface of Damask. The transport set down at North
Qualm, and the fighters circled the area twice before returning to their base
ship. From the cutter, we could hear the booming roar of their thrusters
rolling around the plateaux and valleys. Midas quickly switched the cutter’s
systems to minimum operation so they wouldn’t make a chance detection of
our instrumentation.
AEMOS TALKED WITH Rhizor for most of the afternoon, and he seemed
calmer and more willing to help once food had been given to him. As the
light began to fail and evening approached, Aemos came to find me.
‘If you want a way back in, that man might be able to help you.’
‘Go on.’
‘He knows the mines and the excavations. He worked there for a goodly
while. I’ve spoken to him at length, and he seems certain he could show
you to a cave network that links with the mining structure.’
WE SET OUT after dark in the speeder. Fischig drove, using the terrain
scanner to see rather than the lamps. That made progress slower but more
discreet. I sat next to him, and Bequin rode in the back with Rhizor. There
had been some debate about which of us should go, but I had made the final
selection. The speeder could hold four, and though Midas was the most able
combatant in my group, more able than even the chastener in my view, I
wanted him at the helm of the cutter, ready to respond. Besides, Bequin had
uses of her own that I considered vital to our endeavour.
It took a long time to make the trek back to the North Qualm region, and
we didn’t arrive until well into the second half of the night. Clouds had
masked the sky, hiding the moon and stars, and the only light was the flare
of the volcanic hills, underlighting the low clouds with a fluctuating red
haze. The air was thick with sulphurous smoke.
We left the speeder concealed in a hollow, its position flagged by a
marker tag, and headed west around the outreaches of the area, the ‘flame
hills’ as Rhizor called them.
Nocturnal creatures chattered and fluted in the darkness. Something
larger and more distant howled. Pressing through the thorn-scrub, we
became aware of the harsh artificial lighting bathing the entire settlement.
The volcanoes rumbled.
It took Rhizor a little time to find what he was looking for: a series of
small, shallow pools, half-filled with geothermally heated water. The
syrupy surfaces of the pools seethed and bubbled, and the site was plagued
with insects drawn by the heat. Rhizor splashed cautiously into the largest
pool, and worked his way around a massive boulder that was swathed in
bright orange lichen. Behind it, masked by thorn and cycad, was a narrow
cavity. This, he said, as best as I could understand him, was the route by
which he had escaped from the slave-gangs.
We checked weapons and equipment and prepared to enter. I had opened
the weapons locker on the cutter and provided us with as much efficient
firepower as we could comfortably manage. I had my power-sword, an
autopistol in a rig under my coat, and a las-carbine with a lamp pack taped
under the muzzle. Other items of equipment filled the pack on my back.
Bequin had kept her autopistol, and taken a flat-bladed knife, and she too
had a lamp. I’d given Fischig an old but well-maintained heavy stubber,
which seemed to please him enormously. He had his Arbites pistol, and a
satchel full of spare ammo drums for the stubber. Rhizor had refused a
weapon. I was certain he would leave us once we were safely en route
anyway.
The cavity allowed us to enter single file. I led the way, with Rhizor
behind me, then Bequin, and Fischig brought up the rear. It was damnably
hot in the narrow rock passage, and the sulphurous gases forced us to wear
our rebreathers. Rhizor had no breather, but tied a swathe of cloth around
his nose and mouth. This was the practice the slaves had used when
working the mines.
The passage wound back and forth, and climbed for a while as it coiled
into the hill. In places, it was so steep we had to climb up the ragged floor
of the burrow. Twice we had to remove our equipment packs to ease
through constricted sections.
After an hour, I began to feel the oppressive throb of the psychic veil
shrouding North Qualm. As we penetrated it, I listened out for the sound of
alarms or activity, but none came. Though she didn’t know it, Bequin was
already doing her job by creating a dead spot that allowed us to press on
invisibly. I made sure none of us strayed too far from her aura of influence.
The lava flues were crawling with lifeforms adjusted to existence in the
hot, chemical-rich environment: blind, toad-like hunters, transparent
beetles, albino molluscs and spiders that looked like they were fashioned
from white gold. A fat, pallid centipede as long as my arm spurred its way
over the baked rock at one junction.
Every few minutes the earth trembled. Loose rock and dust showered
down from the roof, and warm, reeking gases blew back along the winding
rock halls.
The passage widened, and showed signs of excavation. Thorn-wood
props supported the ceiling, and marker boards with numbers chalked on
them were nailed to every sixth post. Rhizor tried to explain where we
were. He did his best, and I was able to ascertain we were in a section of
mine that had been worked and then abandoned. He said other things too,
but the meaning was beyond me. He led us to the end of one working, a
low, propped tunnel, and I shone my light into a cavity that had been dug
out of the loose shale and grit. Bequin knelt and brushed grit off the floor
with her hand. She exposed old tiles, made of a dull, metallic substance I
couldn’t identify. The tiles were perfectly fitted, despite the fact that they
were irregular octagons. They were strangely unsymmetrical, with some
edges overlong. Yet they all fitted almost seamlessly. We could not begin to
account for it, and the pattern they made was intensely uncomfortable.
At the rear of the cavity, ancient stonework had been exposed. I was no
expert, but the stone, a hard pale material glittering with flecks of mica,
didn’t look local. There was evidence that parts of it had been cut away
with rock drills and cutting beams.
‘This is old,’ said Fischig. He ran his hand across the riven stone facing,
‘but the damage is new.’
‘The wheel-graves,’ Alizabeth Bequin said suddenly. I looked over at her.
‘On Bonaventure,’ she explained, remembering her homeworld. ‘There
were famous old sites in the western hills, made by races before man. They
were arranged in radiating circles, like wheels. I used to go there, when I
was a child. They had been decorated once, I suppose, but the surfaces had
been cut away. Ransacked by later hands. It reminds me of this.’
‘There are many who make a trade in archaeological plunder,’ said
Fischig. ‘And if it’s xenos artefacts, the penalty is high.’
I’d overheard Glaw and his allies mention archeoxenon materials. If this
was such a site, connected in some way to the as yet mysterious saruthi, it
accounted for the way they persisted in working it despite the volcano.
What had they taken from here? What was it worth to them? What was it
worth to the saruthi?
We retraced our steps back to the main seam, passing three more
abandoned cavities. Each one had shown signs of the old stonework, and
each had been robbed like the first.
We came to the end of the seam, and a metal ladder rose up through
scaffolding to an opening in the rock ten metres up.
We climbed up into another tunnel, and at once heard the rattle of rock
drills. The atmosphere was clearer here, and we were able to remove our
rebreathers. Cold air, from the surface, I guessed, breezed down the tunnel.
With extreme caution, we passed along, crossing the mouth of a gigantic
cavern that had probably been a magmatic reservoir. The walls were
polished and fused by heat. Crouching low, we looked in, and saw work
gangs of men and women, undoubtedly Rhizor’s kinfolk, forming basket
chains to clear rock debris from the workface. There were at least a dozen
of the bestial guards in their black, spiked armour. One walked the workline
and administered encouragement with an electro-lash.
I peered in more intently, and tried to make sense of the main working.
Two Damaskite slaves worked with rock drills, cutting back the crust of
wall, exposing a wide stretch of the old stone facing. Other slaves, most of
them women, laboured closely on the exposed section with small picks,
awls and brashes, revealing carvings of intricate design.
A relay of shouts ran down the guard line, and we hid ourselves in the
tunnel shadows. From up ahead, lamps bobbed and wove, and a party of
men came down the tunnel from the surface into the cavern. Three were
guards, two grey-shrouded supervisors with data-slates. The others were
Gorgone Locke and the pipe-smoker Girolamo Malahite.
As I suspected, members of the Glaw cabal had escaped House Glaw
alive. Estrum’s rogue fleet had no doubt played a part in that salvation.
Locke was dressed in a leather robe with armoured panels woven into it.
His mouth still showed the wound I had inflicted there. His mood was
sullen.
Malahite was dressed in black as I had seen him before. He stood,
studying data-slates, conferring with the dig supervisors and the leader of
the guard team before moving to look at the exposed stretch of archeoxenon
material. The slave workers shrank back out of his way.
He exchanged a few words with the men around him, and the guard
leader hurried off, returning with a bulky rocksaw. The tool trailed cables
and tubes behind it, back to a socket junction at the mouth of the cavern,
where it linked to a system of power and water supply lines running back
up the tunnel to the generators and pumps at the surface.
The saw whined into life, pumping a sheen of water over its blade to
keep it clean and cool. The guard leader carefully sliced the blade into the
rock, the saw keening as it bit. In a few seconds, he had cut a slice of the
carvings free. As far as I could tell, the carvings were made on individual
stone blocks, and he was slicing the sculpted faces off the stones. He cut
two more, and they were passed with reverence to Malahite, who studied
them and then handed them on to be wrapped in plastic and placed in
wooden carriers. The slices looked very much like the old stone tablets I
had seen in that private study under House Glaw.
There was a loud crack. The guard leader had cut another tablet away, but
it had broken into fragments. He dropped the saw and began to collect up
the fragments frantically as those around him cursed and shouted. Locke
moved in.
He kicked the man hard and dropped him to the ground, then kicked him
repeatedly as he lay there, trying to shield his face, begging for mercy.
Malahite gathered up the fragments.
‘You were told to be careful, you useless bastard!’ Locke was growling.
‘It can be repaired,’ Malahite told the ship master. ‘I can fuse it together.’
Locke wasn’t listening. He kicked the man again, then dragged him up
and threw him against the wall. He cursed at him some more and the man
whimpered, pleading apologies.
Locke turned away from the battered wretch. Then he picked up the
revving saw, swung back, and dismembered the guard leader.
It was inhuman. The agonised screams filled the chamber. All the slaves
wailed and moaned, and even the guards looked away in distaste. Locke
laid in with murderous glee, covering himself in blood.
Then he tossed the smoking saw onto the ground at his feet, and turned to
another of the guards. He pointed to the saw.
‘Make sure you do a better job,’ he snarled.
With huge reluctance, the guard picked up the saw and set to work.
LOCKE, MALAHITE AND their party left after another ten minutes, followed
by a work gang carrying the wooden crates full of cut tablets. We waited a
few minutes, then followed them up the tunnel.
There was daylight ahead, scarce and thin. The tunnel came up into what
I guessed was the large modular shed I had seen from my reconnaissance.
Workers milled around on rest breaks, and guards and the grey-robed
overseers wandered back and forth. Dig equipment and tools were piled up
in the poorly lit shed. Fischig found a door at the back of the shed behind
equipment boxes and broke the lock. The four of us were able to slip out of
the shed from the rear into the settlement without having to pass through the
main mine entrance and thus be seen.
We were now in a back lane of North Qualm, with the volcano slopes
behind us. Rotting and abandoned buildings stood close all around, and
flurries of ash and soot blew down over us. We kept close to the walls,
holding back out of sight when anybody passed.
Behind the next jumble of ruins lay a cleared area partly masked by more
flak-board screens, designed to keep the ash out. Two launches sat on the
scorched ground: a large Imperial navy transport and a smaller, older
shuttle. A thicker layer of ash coated the older shuttle’s hull.
Figures moved around the entry ramps of both ships. Guards and workers
were moving the wooden stretchers of excavated artefacts up into the belly
hold of the navy launch. I could see Locke and Malahite standing nearby
with several of the supervisors and three battlefleet officers in shipboard
fatigues. One, a lean man with a receding chin and bulging eyes, wore the
ribbons and insignia of a captain. Our rogue, Estrum. As I watched, the
ecclesiarch Dazzo emerged from a nearby building and crossed to them,
holding the hem of his rich gown up out of the ash.
Shouting suddenly boomed across the yard. An angry human voice
followed by a deeper, more savage sound that set the hairs on my neck up.
Lord Oberon Glaw, dressed in a cloak and body armour, slammed out of
the building Dazzo had emerged from, striding across the landing yard. A
second later, the huge, ghastly bulk of the Chaos Space Marine followed
him, raging and cursing.
Glaw wheeled and faced the giant monster, resuming his argument at the
top of his voice. For all his size, the lord of House Glaw was dwarfed by the
vividly armoured blasphemy. The Traitor Marine had removed his helmet:
his face was a white, powdered, lifeless mask of hate, with smears of gold
dust and purple skin paint around the hollow eyes and a dry, lipless mouth
full of pearl-inlaid teeth. His only vaguely human face seemed to have been
sutured onto his skull, the exposed parts of which were machined gold.
There was a terrible stink of cloying perfume and organic corruption. I
could not imagine the courage – or insanity – that it took to face down a
Chaos Space Marine in a furious argument.
The wind was against us, and all we could hear was the violent snarl of
the voices instead of actual words. Dazzo and Malahite quickly crossed to
Glaw’s side, and most of the other guards and workers present cowered
back.
The wind changed a little.
‘...will not deny me any longer, you human filth!’ The awful voice of the
Traitor Marine could suddenly be heard.
‘You will show me respect, Mandragore! Respect!’ Glaw yelled back, his
voice powerful but seemingly frail against the roar of the Chaos warrior.
The Marine bellowed something else that ended in ‘...slay you all and
finish this work myself! My masters await, and they await the perfect
completion of this task! They will not idle their time while you vermin
dawdle and slacken!’
‘You will abide by our pact! You will keep to our agreement!’
I realised I had almost become hypnotised. Staring at the monstrous,
raging figure, drawn to him by his power and sheer horror, my eyes had
lingered too long on the obscene runic carvings that edged the joints of his
armour, the insane sigils that decorated his chest plate. I was entranced,
captivated by the golden chains that dressed his luridly painted armour, the
gems and exquisite filigree covering his armour plate, the translucent silk of
his cloak, and the words, the alien, abominable words, inscribed upon his
form, twitching and seeming with secrets older then time... secrets,
promises, lies...
I forced myself not to look. Soul-destroying madness lay in the marks
and brands of Chaos if one looked too long.
Mandragore shrieked in fury and raised a massive gloved fist, spiked
with rusty blades, to smash Lord Glaw.
The blow didn’t fall. I started, as if slapped, as a burst of psychic power
rippled across the concourse.
Mandragore stepped back a pace. Dazzo moved towards him. Smaller
than Glaw or Locke, Dazzo seemed even more insignificant next to the
monster, but with each step he took, the Chaos Marine moved backwards.
He didn’t speak, but I could hear his voice in my head. The presence and
the words were so foul I barely managed not to vomit.
‘Mandragore Carrion, son of Fulgrim, worthy of Slaanesh, champion of
the Emperor’s Children, killer of the living, defiler of the dead, keeper of
secrets – your presence here honours us, and we celebrate our pact with
your fellowship... but you will not seek to harm us. Never raise your hand
to us again. Never.’
Dazzo was simply the most potent psyker I had ever encountered. With
his mind alone, he had forced down one of the vilest of the traitors, a Space
Marine sworn to the corrupt service of Chaos.
Mandragore turned away, and strode off across the compound. I saw now
how Lord Glaw wilted from the confrontation, his bravado spent. Many of
the workers present were weeping with the trauma of the exchange, and two
of the guards were throwing up.
Shaking, I looked round at my companions. Fischig was ashen-faced and
trembling, his eyes closed. Rhizor had curled up in a ball in the ashy mud,
his back against the wall.
Bequin had vanished.
FIFTEEN
Exposed in the midst of the foe.
An ill-matched war.
Flight.
I HAD A second to realise that wherever Bequin had gone, it had left us
exposed, outside the veil of her untouchable aura. I heard a cry, a strangled
warning from the old ecclesiarch that was immediately accompanied by the
hoot of sirens.
In the landing yard, guards were racing towards us. Dazzo was pointing
directly at the section of ruin that concealed us. Locke pulled a laspistol
from his robe. Angry voices, the raucous bark of cygnids.
‘Fischig!’ I cried. ‘Fischig! Move or we’re dead!’
He blinked, still pale, as if he didn’t recognise his own name.
I slapped him hard around the side of his head.
‘Move, chastener!’ I yelled.
The first of the guards had reached the ruins, and one was kicking his
way in through a boarded-up door. I saw his staring face looking out of a
dirty black visor. He raised his lasgun.
I swung the powerful carbine up and laced him and the doorway with a
spray of laser shots. Stone and wood debris spat and flew from the multiple
impacts.
Las-shots whined in through gaps in the stone work and exploded against
the outside wall.
Fischig’s heavy stubber chattered into life. He played the sweep of
blazing tracer shots down the dark cavities of the ruin to our left, tearing
apart two more guards who were forcing their way in.
More guards, to my right, fired their weapons. My las-carbine crackled
on full auto, a blur of high-pitched whines, as I raked the narrow entrance
and dropped another three.
Still firing, Fischig backed into the depths of the ruin.
‘Come on!’ he snarled. I backed with him, our weapons laying down a
storm of explosive metal and piercing energy that rippled across the rain
walls, scattering debris, spraying ash dust and bursting bodies.
Rhizor, his mind utterly gone with terror, lay on the ground. I grabbed
him by the scruff of his rags and dragged him after us. He fought at me,
despairing.
A large figure came leaping in though the window space in the wall
through which we had observed the dealings in the yard. It was Locke. He
rolled as he landed, his laspistol retching shots.
One shot clipped my left shoulder. Another three slammed into Rhizor’s
back and he toppled into me, knocking me flat.
Fischig saw Locke, and swung round, his finger not lifting from the
stubber’s blunt trigger. The rapidly cycling mechanism of the heavy weapon
made a high, grinding metallic noise overlaid with the frenetic blasts of the
shots.
The scant cover around Locke disintegrated, and he cried out as he threw
himself behind a section of wall. He fired as he moved, and Fischig granted
in pain as a las-shot punched into his side.
‘Eisenhorn! You bastard!’ Locke bellowed. I pulled myself out from
under Rhizor’s corpse, sad that that ragged slave had paid such a price for
assisting an inquisitor. Another crime on the shoulders of Gorgone Locke.
Damning the ship master’s name, I pulled a frag grenade from my pack,
and tossed it in Locke’s direction. Then Fischig and I moved as fast as we
could out through the rear of the smoke-filled ruin.
The grenade blew out the back of the structure. I hoped to the Emperor it
had torn Locke limb from limb.
Coughing and spitting, Fischig and I came out into a ditch that ran behind
the ruined dwellings of North Qualm and the newer modular buildings.
Angled over us were the large flak-board baffles of the ash-screens.
Las-shots chipped and whacked into the screens and wailed down the
dim ditch. Guards tumbled into the ditch twenty metres away, rabidly
howling cygnids pouring in with them.
Fischig made the ditch his killing field, and emptied his second drum of
ammunition down the length, pulverising guard and canine alike. We
hurried in the opposite direction as he struggled to clamp in a fresh drum.
Guards were shooting at us through the ruins, blowing chunks from the
mouldering stonework. We ran on, chased by the furious salvos.
The ditch ran out into a small yard where an eight-wheeler truck was
parked. We exchanged shots with three guards who rounded the corner into
the yard and dropped them, but a fourth appeared, loosing a trio of cygnids
from their leashes. Baying, they pounded across the yard. I killed one with
my carbine, but the truck blocked any shots at the others. The big vehicle
rocked as one leapt up into its frame. A moment later, it was leaping over
onto us. I put a las-round through its skull as it came down, its muscled bulk
just missing me. The other came out from under the truck, filthy with axle
grease, and leapt at Fischig. It knocked him over, its huge jaws locked
around his armoured forearm.
I drew my powersword and thrust the crackling blade through its body.
More shots, thumping into the truck.
‘Get up!’ I told Fischig as we rolled the canine’s dead weight off him.
The entire compound closing around us, we sprinted to the rear of a
modular shed and broke the door in.
It was an equipment store, stacked with spare blades for rock drills,
spools of cable, lamp-cells, and all manner of other mining equipment. We
moved low between the piles of equipment, hearing shouts and running
footsteps outside.
I paused, changing cells in my carbine, and keyed my vox-link.
‘Thorn wishes aegis, rapturous beasts below.’
‘Aegis, arising, the colours of space,’ came the response immediately.
‘Razor delphus pathway,’ I instructed, ‘Pattern ivory!’
‘Pattern confirm. In six. Aegis, arising.’
Guards burst into the back of the shed, and Fischig blew them back out
through the prefab wall with a wild burst of shots.
I looked around, and saw a stack of black metal boxes raised on a pallet
in the corner of the shed. The paper labels were old and faded, but I prised
off the lid of one box and confirmed their contents.
‘Get ready to move,’ I said, arming my second grenade.
‘Oh shit!’ said Fischig, seeing what I was doing. He was already half out
the door as I placed the grenade on the top of the boxes.
We came out firing, met by a dozen or more guards who were sectioning
the street looking for us. Most were pit guards in their black, ugly armour,
but three were naval security troops in black cloth fatigues, no doubt part of
the traitor captain’s contingent.
We fired as we ran. The grenade was on a ten-second fuse. The fact that
we ran through the midst of them caught them unawares. None of them was
able to get a clean shot off.
Fischig and I dived headlong over a crumbling section of wall that had
once surrounded North Qualm’s market yard.
The grenade went off. And so did the stack of mining explosives it had
been sitting on.
The shockwave concussion flattened every wall for thirty metres. The
upwards force of the blast, driving before it a blistering fireball, lifted the
whole modular shed twenty metres into the air and sent the shredded
remains of the structure crashing down onto neighbouring buildings.
Scraps of metal, cinders and shreds of burning flak-board rained down on
Fischig and myself. There was a dazed silence broken only by the warble of
alarms, cries of the injured and desperate shouting. The air was fogged by
ash dust. Pulling on our rebreathers, we stumbled through the murk.
I felt a jab of pain in my head. Deep, insidious, burning. Dazzo was
reaching out with his terrifyingly potent mind, looking for us.
We stumbled through the smoke down an aisle between modular sheds
whose windows had been blown out in the detonation.
The pain grew more intense.
‘Eisenhorn. You cannot hide. Show yourself.’
I gasped as the pain took deeper hold.
Suddenly, it eased.
‘Fischig! In here!’
I pushed him into an old stone outbuilding. I guessed it had once been a
wash-house in North Qualm’s more rural heyday.
Bequin was cowering in a corner, filthy, tearful. The sight of the Child of
the Emperor Mandragore had sent her fleeing in blind panic. Like me, she
had made the mistake of looking at the runes and marks on his foul,
dazzling armour. Unlike me, she hadn’t had the sense to look away.
She couldn’t speak. She barely registered us. But we were back inside her
muzzling aura and out of Dazzo’s clutches for the moment.
‘What now?’ asked Fischig. ‘They’ll regroup quickly enough.’
‘Midas is coming. We have to get back to the landing yard. It’s the only
area big enough for him to set down in.’
Fischig looked at me as if I was mad. ‘He’s going to fly into this? He’ll
be killed! And even if he does pick us up, they’ll launch interceptors from
the fleet. They’ll launch them the moment he powers up for take off!’
‘It’ll be tight,’ I admitted.
We dragged Bequin with us and moved out of the derelict wash-house.
Outside, the settlement was still swathed in ash lifted by the blast. Fierce
fires glowed in the smoke. Voices screamed orders and cygnids bayed.
There was a deeper, furious bellowing too. I had a nasty feeling it was the
Chaos Marine.
‘Thorn attending aegis, main yard area,’ I voxed.
‘Aegis, main yard in three, the heavens falling,’ So, they were on to him.
The fleet had launched ships after the cutter.
We ran now. The smoke was slowly clearing.
A guard gang moved past us and we were forced to double back around.
More guards blocked the next street.
‘Through the buildings!’ said Fischig.
We were behind a modular building, one of the newest and largest that
Dazzo’s unholy mission had set up. There was no door, but we scrambled
up onto the low roof, pulling Bequin with us, and entered through a
skylight.
The room we dropped into was carpeted and well furnished, an office or
private study for one of the senior supervisors. There were racks of data-
slates, and piles of charts and storage tiles. Several large travel trunks had
been piled in one corner, with a cloak and two overcoats draped over them.
One of the new arrivals from the launch had left these things here and not
yet unpacked them.
‘Come on!’ hissed Fischig, checking the door that led out of the office
into the rest of the building.
‘Wait!’ I said. I cut the locks off the trunks with my powersword and
threw the lids back. In the first, clothes, slates, a boxed lasgun, ornate and
inlaid with the name Oberon. Other miscellaneous effects.
‘Come on!’ Fischig repeated, frantic.
‘Aegis, main yard in two,’ crackled the vox.
‘Eisenhorn? What are you playing at?’ Fischig demanded.
‘These are Glaw’s things!’ I said, searching
‘So what? What are you looking for?’
‘I don’t know,’ I turned to the second trunk. More clothes, some crude
and unpleasant religious icons.
Fischig grabbed me by the shoulder. ‘With respect, inquisitor, that would
suggest this isn’t the time to be doing it!’
‘We have to get out of here, we have to get the hell out of here,’ Bequin
murmured, her eyes darting back and forth at every sound from outside.
‘There’ll be something... an edge, a clue... something we can use when
we get out of here...’
‘We’ll be lucky to escape with our lives!’
‘Yes!’ I stared up at him. ‘Yes, we will – and if we do, we’ll want to
continue our struggle against Glaw, won’t we?’
He threw his hands up in despair.
‘Please... please...’ Bequin murmured.
‘Aegis, main yard in one,’ crackled the vox.
The third trunk. A wrapped set of stainless steel surgical tools whose
purpose I didn’t even want to imagine. A small dice and counter game in a
hardwood box. Clothes, more damn clothes!
With something solid wrapped in them.
I took it out.
‘Satisfied?’ asked Fischig.
I would have smiled if Locke had left me able.
‘Go!’ I said.
Beyond the stateroom was an outer annexe. More luggage trunks stood
on the grilled floor, as well as wooden boxes draped in plastic.
‘Don’t even think about it!’ Fischig snapped, seeing me look at the
trunks.
‘Aegis, on site!’ The vox-burst was partly drowned out by the vibrating
roar of a powerful aircraft passing low and fast overhead. There was a
chatter of small arms, the whip of las-rifles.
I led the way out of the annexe, through a hatchway that opened onto the
landing yard. Figures milled around, mainly slave-guards and naval
troopers, looking skywards and firing at the looming gun-cutter that banked
overhead. On the far side of the yard, by the lowered ramp of the navy
launch, Malahite saw us and shouted out. The men swung around, firing.
Shots crackled around us.
Then I saw Mandragore, over to the right of the yard, charging towards
us with a baleful howl.
‘Back inside! Inside!’ I yelled and the three of us tumbled back in
through the door.
The outer wall of the building didn’t stop the Chaos-beast. Neither did
the hatch. Ceramite and steel shod fists tore the lightweight metal apart,
twisted adamite support beams, punctured plastic panels like paper.
Mandragore’s baying wail preceded him, shaking us to the core.
Bequin screamed.
The vilely misnamed Child of the Emperor exploded through the end
wall of the annexe, white lips drawn back around pearl teeth as he hurled
out noise from his augmented torso. The boltgun in his fist was enormous.
‘Not a step closer!’ I yelled. With one hand, I held the primed grenade up
so he could see it.
He laughed, a deep, booming chuckle of contempt.
‘I mean it,’ I added and kicked the crate at my feet. It was laden with
plastic wrapped tablets from the mine.
‘One second fuse. Another step and all this will be gone.’
He faltered. Lord Glaw and several guards appeared through the
shredded wall behind him.
‘For pity’s sake, do as he says!’ Glaw barked.
With a growl, Mandragore lowered his boltgun.
‘Back off, Glaw! Back right off and take them with you!’
‘You can’t hope to escape, inquisitor,’ said Glaw.
‘Back off!’
Glaw waved his men back and retreated. Mandragore backed out slowly,
a growling hiss rising from his throat.
‘Grab the crate!’ I told Fischig. He slung his stubber over his shoulder
and did as he was told.
We edged out into the smoky daylight. Fischig and I were side by side,
and I held the grenade over the crate he was carrying. Bequin cowered
behind us.
In the yard, Glaw was ordering his men back. There were forty or more
troops; guards, naval troopers, supervisors. I saw Dazzo, Malahite and the
rogue captain Estrum among them. Mandragore did not back off as far as
the others. He stayed to the right of us, his shimmering cloak drifting in the
breeze, his armour gleaming. The growl continued to purr in his throat.
‘Midas,’ I said into my link, ‘set down, hatch open.’
‘Understood,’ he replied. ‘Be advised there are three navy interceptors
inbound. Arrival in three.’
The gun-cutter swung in over the yard, casting a wide shadow, its
thrusters lifting clouds of ash. As it came in to rest on its bulky hydraulic
landing skids, the cargo ramp under the cockpit whined and lowered.
Slowly, we moved around until the cutter and the ramp were behind us.
The assembled enemy watched us intently, weapons raised.
‘A stand-off, inquisitor,’ said Glaw.
‘Get your men to lower their weapons. Even the ones I can’t see. Don’t
even consider dropping me. Midas... train the wing cannons on myself and
the chastener. If anything happens to us, open fire.’
‘Confirm.’
The powerful cannons in the wing mounts traversed to target us.
‘Shoot us and the crate is vaporised.’
‘Weapons down!’ Glaw yelled, and the troops obeyed.
‘Now call off those interceptors. Order them right back to their carrier.’
‘I—’
‘Now!’
Glaw looked round at Estrum, who started to speak into a vox link.
‘The interceptors have aborted their run,’ Midas told me. ‘They’re
turning back.’
‘Very good,’ I told Glaw.
‘What now?’ he asked.
What now indeed? We had the upper hand for a moment: they didn’t dare
shoot or rush us, and Bequin was blocking Dazzo and any other psyker they
had.
‘An answer or two,’ I suggested.
‘Eisenhorn!’ Fischig hissed.
‘An answer?’ laughed Glaw. Some of his men laughed too, and
Mandragore rumbled a snigger. I noticed Dazzo and Malahite were both
unamused.
‘This material is archeoxenon, from an old saruthi site,’ I said, lifting one
of the ancient, unsymmetrical tablets from the crate in Fischig’s grasp with
my free hand. ‘It clearly has value to you, because it must have value to the
saruthi. You’re recovering it for them in return for what?’
‘I’m not about to tell you anything,’ Glaw said. ‘I’m not even going to
confirm your suppositions.’
I shrugged. ‘It was worth trying.’
‘My question remains,’ said Glaw. ‘What now?’
‘We leave,’ I told him. ‘Unmolested.’
‘So leave,’ he said, with a mild, dismissive hand gesture. ‘Put down the
crate and leave.’
‘This crate is the only thing that’s stopping you from obliterating us. It
comes with us, as insurance.’
‘No!’ Dazzo cried, pushing forward. ‘Unacceptable! We would lose it
forever!’ He looked at Glaw. ‘This man is our blood foe. We could never
recover the artefacts. Even if we agreed to safe passage, he would not
honour a deal and leave them for our recovery.’
‘Of course not,’ I said. ‘Just as you would not honour any deal struck
with me. It is a sad but true fact that no commitment or agreement of
honour can be made between us. Which is why this crate comes with me.
We have no other surety.’
‘We’re not here to offer you surety, flesh-blister,’ Mandragore said
sonorously. ‘Only death. Or if you’re unlucky, pain and death.’
‘You should keep him out of the negotiations,’ I told Glaw with a
sideways nod at Mandragore. ‘We are leaving with the crate, because you
will destroy us otherwise.’
‘No,’ said Glaw. He stepped forward, pulling a lasgun from his coat.
‘You are tripping on your own smooth logic, inquisitor. If we are to lose
those artefacts for ever, I’d rather it was here, with your deaths as
consolation. If you try to leave with the crate, we will fire anyway and
damn the consequences. Set them down and I will give you ten heartbeats
to leave.’
I could tell it was no bluff. They would go only so far to protect their
trinkets. And they were not fools. They knew I would never return these
items. Ten heartbeats. If we tried to board with the crate, they would fire at
once. If we set it down... they would fire, but perhaps more hesitantly for
fear of hitting the crate. And the cutter’s guns were still a point in our
favour.
‘Back up to the ramp,’ I whispered to Bequin and Fischig. Throw the
crate down when I say.’
Are you sure?’
‘Do as I say. Midas?’
‘Ready drive, ready cannons.’
‘Now!’
The crate crashed over in the dust. The cutter’s engines shrieked into
power. They didn’t wait ten heartbeats. The three of us were on the ramp,
and the ramp was swinging shut under us, and the cutter was lifting around
us. A fusillade of weapons fire hammered off the hull. The cutter’s cannons
roared.
The cutter swung hard about, and we tumbled as the deck pitched.
Fischig cried out and fell on the ramp, spilling half out of the gently closing
entryway. I grabbed him and hauled him inside before his dangling legs
could be severed by the vicing ramp or shot by the enemy below.
We were away. I could tell by the angle of the deck and the vibration of
the ship’s frame that Midas was accelerating hard and keeping low, letting
the landscape shield us from the ground fire. Alarm lights flashed in the
crew-bay, indicating damage.
‘Strap yourself in!’ I yelled at Aemos, who was attempting to rise to
assist us. ‘Fischig, get Bequin in a harness! Yourself too!’
The chastener pulled the terrified girl across the deck and into a seat. I
clambered forward, along the companionway, and up into the cockpit.
Midas was pulling on the controls, taking us higher. The blotchy
landscape of Damask flickered past beneath us. I dropped into the seat
beside him.
‘How close?’
‘The fighters have peeled back, on a direct intercept course. They have
altitude in their favour.’
‘How close?’
‘Six minutes to intercept. Damn!’
‘What?’
He pointed to the main tactical screen. Behind the smaller bright cursors,
larger shapes were moving against the three-dimensional magnetic map of
the planet’s magnetosphere. ‘Their fleet’s moving too. The capital ships.
And that’s two more fighter wings launched.’
‘They don’t want us to get away, do they?’ he added.
‘With what we know?’
‘They won’t let us out of the system alive, will they?’
‘Midas, I think I’ve told you the answer to that.’
He grinned, white teeth contrasting sharply with his dark skin in the
cabin’s half-light.
‘We’re going to have some fun, then,’ he decided. His bare hands,
sparkling with the inlay of Glavian bio-circuits, darted across the controls,
adjusting our course.
‘Ideas?’ I asked.
‘A few possibles. Let me massage the data.’
‘What?’
‘Trust me, Gregor, if we’ve even a shred of hope of getting out of the
Damask system alive, it’ll be through skill and subtlety. Shut up and let me
compute their speeds and intercept vectors.’
‘We took damage from the ground fire,’ I persisted. That hopelessness
was seeping into me again, the feeling of having no ability to influence the
situation.
‘Minor, just minor,’ he said distractedly. ‘The servitors have got it
covered.’
He made a course change. From the screen, I saw this brought us around
almost side on to the chasing fleet components, drastically reducing their
time to intercept and firing range.
‘What are you doing?’
‘Playing the percentages. Playing safe.’
The bright globe of Damask was dropping away beneath us, and we were
driving out into planetary space beyond the highest orbit points at full
thrust.
‘See?’ he said. Another light had appeared on the tactical screen, moving
around ahead of us.
‘Standard Imperial battlefleet dispersal. There’s always a picket ship
positioned on the blind side of the subject world. If we’d kept straight on
we’d have flown right into its fire-field.’
Lights flashed out in the void beyond the cockpit windows. The picket
ship, a medium frigate, was firing anyway, running interference, driving us
on.
‘It’s launched fighters,’ Midas reported in a sing-song voice. ‘Range in
two. Chasers have range in four.’
So matter-of-fact.
I looked at the power levels. Every one of the cutter’s powerful thrusters
was red-lining.
‘Midas...’
‘Sit back. There it is.’
‘What is?’
The small moon was suddenly filling our front ports as we veered
around. It didn’t look that small. It looked like we were about to smash into
it.
I blurted out a curse.
‘Relax, dammit!’ he assured me, then added, ‘range in one.’
We dived towards the scarred, pocked lime-green rock that filled our
vision at full thrust. Nose guns beginning to flash; six interceptors of the
Battlefleet Scarus elite fighter school followed us in.
SIXTEEN
Void duel.
Betancore’s last stand.
Traces.
THE MOON WAS called Obol, the smallest and innermost of Damask’s
fourteen satellites. It was a dented, irregular nugget of nickel, zinc and
selenium, six hundred kilometres across at its widest dimension. Lacking
atmosphere and riddled with cavities and gorges, it shone with a lambent
green glow in the light of the star, ragged terrain features and craters thrown
into stark relief.
I was forcing my mind to calm, forcing my pulse rate down. The old
mind skills Hapshant had trained me in.
I focused on the data-file for Obol that I had punched up on the screen –
nickel, zinc, selenium, smallest of fourteen – not because I wanted to know
but because the facts would act as psychopomps, little fetishes of detail to
occupy my mind and steal it away from the hazard.
I looked up from the glowing text bar. A jagged crater, vast enough to
swallow Dorsay city and its lagoon whole yawned up at us.
‘Brace yourselves,’ Midas told us all.
Just a kilometre above, he executed his move. By then, we were deeply
committed to Obol’s gravity and diving at full thrust. There was no question
of performing a landing, or even a conventional turn.
But Midas had been flying ships since he was young, schooled in the
pilot academies of Glavia. By way of his inlaid circuitry, he understood the
nuances of flight, power and manoeuvre better than me, and better than
most professional pilots in the Imperium. He had also tested the capabilities
of the gun-cutter almost to destruction, and knew exactly what it could and
couldn’t do.
What worried me most was what he hoped it might do.
He cut the drive, fired all the landing thrusters, and pulled the nose
around so that the cutter began to corkscrew. The view whirled before my
eyes and I was flung around in my harness.
The spin seemed uncontrolled. But it was measured and perfect. With the
landing jets driving us up away from the vertical, we fluttered, like a leaf,
using the corkscrew motion to rob the vessel of downward momentum.
Ninety metres from the dust of the crater floor, we flattened out, burning
jets hard, white hot, and then arced around as Midas cut the main drive in
again.
The ground leapt away under us, and we hugged across it, climbing in a
savage jerk to skip over the crater lip.
From the tactical display, I saw all six fighters had dropped back to six
minutes behind us. None wanted to try duplicating that move. They were
diving in more conventional, slower arcs.
Midas hugged the moon, slicing us low around bluffs and buttes, down
deep dry valleys hidden from the sun, across wide dust plains that had never
seen a footprint. At one point, we flew between two massive cliffs of
striated rock.
‘They’re breaking,’ Midas said, leaning us to port.
They were. Four dropped into dogged pursuit, chasing us low over the
landscape. The other two had broken and were heading anti-clockwise
around the blindside of Obol.
‘Contact?’
‘We’ll meet them head on in eight minutes,’ said Midas. He was smiling.
He pulled a hard starboard turn down a rift valley the topographer screen
had only just illuminated.
Then he slowed down to what seemed a painful, easy velocity, and
banked the gun cutter around a butte that glistened green and yellow in the
hard sunlight.
‘What are you doing?’
‘Wait... wait...’
The tactical screen showed that our four chasers had swept beyond the
rift valley.
‘This low to the terrain, it’ll take them a moment to figure out we’re no
longer ahead of them.’
‘What now?’
He gunned the engines and threw us out over a dust bowl after the pursuit
ships.
‘Mouse becomes cat,’ he said.
Within seconds, a bright blob on the weapons array had been covered
with red crosshairs.
Ahead of us, through a landscape of giant rocks and towering mesas that
whipped by at a distressing speed, I saw the flare of afterburners.
‘Scratch one,’ said Midas, firing the wing cannons.
The engine flare far ahead flashed and then turned into an expanding ball
of burning gases which swept past us in jagged streaks.
I was pulled back into my seat as we jinked painfully down another
valley. There was another flash, of sunlight off metal, a kilometre ahead.
‘And two,’ said Midas.
The read-out on the autoloaders notched up red tags as drums expended.
The flash blossomed with light, and then again more brightly as it spun and
struck the valley wall.
Something blindingly brilliant went off to our right, and the cabin rocked,
alarms squealing.
‘Smart boy, too close,’ said Midas, hauling on the stick to avoid an
incoming cliff.
One of the fighters had gauged our feint and come around across us.
‘Where’s the other? Where’s the other?’ Midas murmured.
We had firepower on our side, firepower and Midas. The fighters were
Lightnings, small, fast and dextrous, less than a quarter our size. For all
intents and purposes, the gun-cutter was a transport, but its drive and
weapon enhancements and its vertical thrust capability made it a formidable
fighting ship when it came to a skirmish close down over terrain like this.
Something hit us hard, and we went over in a dizzying fall. Midas cursed
and drew us back round in a tight turn. An Imperial fighter, just a blur of
silver, crossed our field of vision.
Midas turned us again, and went after it. It ducked and turned down the
deep gorges of the moon, flying by instruments alone in the cold shadows.
The gun-sensors picked up its heat trail. Midas fired on it.
He missed.
It tried to turn in a loop to come round at us. Midas fired again.
Another miss.
It came right at us. I could see the tracer jewels of its shots ripping at us.
Head to head. In a steep, deep gorge.
No room for manoeuvre. No room for error.
‘Goodbye,’ said Midas, thumbing the fire stud.
An explosion lit the deep gulf and we flew right through the flame wash.
‘Had enough yet?’ Midas asked me.
I didn’t reply. I was too busy gripping my armrests.
‘I have,’ he said. ‘Time for phase two. There’s another hunter right
around us, and the blindsiders will be coming up in ninety seconds. A little
theatrics now. Uclid?’
The chief servitor warbled a response.
We went into a dive, hard. A display told me we were venting a trail of
engine gases.
‘Damage?’ I asked.
‘Play acting,’ he told me.
The dark canyon floor rushed up to meet us.
‘Jettison, Uclid,’ Midas ordered.
There was a thump and a bang. The cutter rocked. Behind us, something
flared.
‘What was that?’
Two tonnes of spares, trash and expendable supplies. Plus all the
grenades from your weapons store.’
He banked us around hard, and we zoomed into a darker cavity, a wide,
deep cave in the canyon base. The walls and roof seemed dangerously
close.
Six hundred metres into the cave, Midas turned the cutter to the left,
cutting the thrust, floodlights piercing the gloom and reflecting off the
jagged cavity.
Another hundred metres, and we settled into the dust on our landing
struts. Midas cut power, cut the lights, cut everything except the most
rudimentary life support.
‘Nobody make a sound,’ he said.
THE WAIT, WHICH lasted for sixty-six hours, was neither comfortable nor
pleasant. We wore heat gowns and sat in the gloom as, above us, the heretic
fleet scoured Obol and its immediate zone for traces of us. Eight times in
the first ten hours our passive sensors registered vehicle movement and
scanning in the gorge where we had faked our destruction. The deception
was apparently convincing.
But we bided our time. There was no telling how persistent they would
be, or how patient. Midas thought it likely they might be playing the same
trick as us, lying up quiet and waiting until we betrayed ourselves by
movement or signal.
After forty hours, Lowink was confident he had overheard astropathic
traffic exchanges indicating a fleet departure, shortly followed by a tremor
in the fabric of the fathomless immaterium. But still we waited. Waited for
the one thing that I would take as convincing.
Just after the turn of the sixty-sixth hour, it came. An astropathic signal in
Glossia: ‘Nunc dimittis.’
WE LOFTED FROM the darkness of Obol into the starlight. Everyone on the
ship, myself included, I freely admit, was suddenly talking too loud and too
much as we moved around, basking in the bright cabin lights and the
restored heating systems. The silent, cold wait had been like a penance.
The Essene, slow and majestic, moved in to meet us. Once the heretic
fleet had left the system, Maxilla had emerged from hiding in the star’s
corona and sent his signal.
AS SOON AS we were docked, I went straight to the bridge where Maxilla
greeted me like a brother.
‘Are we all alive?’ he asked.
‘In one piece, though it was close.’
‘I’m sorry I had to desert you, but you saw the size of that battlegroup.’
I nodded. ‘I’m hoping you can tell me where it went.’
‘Naturally,’ he replied. His astronavigators had not been idle. The chief
of them emerged from their annexe at the side of the domed bridge and
hummed across the red-black marble of the floor to join us. Like all of his
crew, it was essentially mechanical. Its organic, human component – my
guess was no more than a brain and some key organs – supported both
physically and biologically in a polished silver servitor sculpted in the form
of a griffin, its draconian neck swept back so its beaked visage stared down
at us. It floated on anti-grav plates built into its eagle wings.
It paused before us, and projected a holographic chart from its open beak.
The star map was complex, and incomprehensible to the unschooled eye,
but I made out some detail.
‘The navigators have analysed the warp-wake of the departing fleet and
made a number of algorithmic computations. The heretics are moving out
of the Helican sub-sector, out of Imperial space itself, into the forbidden
stellar territories of a breed I believe are known as the saruthi.’
‘I had guessed as much. But that in itself is a considerable area, more
than a dozen systems. We need specifics.’
‘Here,’ said Maxilla, indicating a point on the shimmering three
dimensional chart with one gloved hand. ‘The charts have it as KCX-1288.
Under optimal conditions, it’s thirty weeks away from here.’
‘And what is the margin for error on this calculation?’
‘No greater than point zero six. The warp-wake of the fleet was quite
considerable. They may of course break the journey and re-route, but we
will be watching for changes in their wake.’
‘Of course,’ he added, ‘They will presume us to be following. Even if
they think you’re dead, they’ll know you had to have had a starship that
brought you here. One they couldn’t find.’
The thought had crossed my mind too. Glaw and his conspirators must at
least now be expecting pursuit, or expecting someone to inform on their
whereabouts and destination. They would now be trusting on vigilance,
their considerable massed firepower, and their headstart.
I already had Lowink busy preparing an emergency communiqué to send
back to Gudrun and Inquisition command.
‘What do you know of the saruthi and their territory?’
‘Nothing,’ he said. ‘I’ve never travelled there.’
I thought this a curiously brief answer for a man so usually talkative.
‘So,’ he said at length, ‘apart from our knowledge of where they’re
going, have we any other advantages?’
‘We have,’ I took from my coat pocket the item that had rested there ever
since I had liberated it from Glaw’s travelling trunk in North Qualm.
Maxilla regarded it with frank perplexity.
‘This,’ I told him, ‘is the Pontius.’
WE USED A large, empty hold in the depths of the Essene. Some of
Maxilla’s servitors arranged lighting and powerfeeds. My own servitors –
Modo and Nilquit – carried the claw-footed casket in and set in on the cold
steel floor.
I stood watching, my hands buried deep in my overcoat pockets against
the cold of the chamber. Aemos hunched over the casket and, with Nilquit’s
aid, began to connect cables. I looked over at Bequin. She stood next to
Fischig, and was bundled up in a heavy red gown with a grey shawl, and
there was an expression of grim reluctance on her face. She’d found it all
fun at first, a game, even in the face of danger at House Glaw. But Damask
had changed things for her. The monster Mandragore. She knew it wasn’t a
game anymore. She’d seen things that many – perhaps even most – citizens
of the Imperium never see. Most lives are spent on safe worlds far from the
touch of war and horror, and the obscenities that lurk out there in the
darkest parts of the void are myths or rumours... if that.
But now she knew. Perhaps it had changed her mind. Perhaps she didn’t
want to be here any more. Perhaps she was now regretting jumping so
eagerly for the offer I’d made her.
I didn’t ask her. She’d tell me if she had to. We were all too committed
now.
‘Eisenhorn?’ Aemos reached out his hands and I placed the cool hard ball
of the Pontius in them. With almost priestly care, he fitted it into place.
I ordered everyone back out of the hold, even the servitors, everyone
except Bequin and Aemos. Fischig closed the hold door behind him.
Aemos looked at me and I nodded assent. He made the final connection
and then backed away from the casket as hurriedly as his old and
augmetised limbs could manage.
At first, nothing. Small tell-tale lights winked along the edge of the
casket – Eyclone’s casket – and the internal wiring glowed.
Then I felt a change in air-pressure. Bequin looked at me sharply, feeling
it too.
The metal walls of the hold began to sweat. Beads of moisture popped
and dribbled down the wall plating.
There was a faint crackling sound, like the gentle crisping of paper in
flames. It spread, growing louder. Frost was forming on the casket, on the
floor around it, spreading out across the hold’s decking, up the walls, across
the ceiling. A glittering thickness of diamond frost coated the interior of the
hold in less than ten seconds. Our breath steamed in the air and we brushed
jewels of ice-dust off our clothes and eyelashes.
‘Pontius Glaw,’ I said.
There was no answer, but after a moment or two, a series of animal
grunts and barks mewled from the vox-speakers built into the casket.
‘Glaw,’ I repeated.
‘What—’ said an artificial voice.
Bequin stiffened.
‘What have you woken me to?’
‘What is the last thing you remember, Glaw?’
‘Promises... promises...’ the voice said, coming and going as if drifting
away from the microphone and then back. ‘Where is Urisel?’
‘What promises were made to you, Glaw?’
‘Life...’ it murmured. ‘Where is Urisel?’ There was a tone now, an anger
or an impatience. ‘Where is he?’
I began to frame another question, but there was a sudden flash of
activity, a crackle of electronic synapses firing across the crystal surface of
the ball. It had lashed out with its mind, with its potent psychic powers. If
Bequin had not been here, cancelling it out, no doubt Aemos and I would
have been dead.
‘Temper, temper...’ I said. I took a step towards the casket. ‘I am
Eisenhorn, Imperial inquisitor. You are my prisoner and you only enjoy
cognitive function because I allow it. You will answer my questions.’
‘I... will... not.’
I shrugged. ‘Aemos, disconnect this menace and prepare it for
disintegration!’
‘Wait! Wait!’ the voice was pleading despite its colourless artificiality.
I knelt down in front of the casket. ‘I know that your life and intellect
were preserved in this device, Pontius Glaw. I know you have waited for
two centuries, trapped in a bodiless state, desperate to be made whole again.
That is what your family promised you, wasn’t it?’
‘Urisel promised... he said it be so... the methods were prepared...’
‘To sacrifice the nobility of Hubris so that their life energies might be
siphoned off into you through this casket. To give you the power to create a
body for yourself.’
‘He promised!’ The stress fell on the second word, anguished and deep.
‘Urisel and the others abandoned you, Pontius. They abandoned the
Hubris project at the last minute in favour of something else. They are now
all in the custody of the Inquisition.’
‘Nooooo...’ The word turned into a hiss that died away. ‘They would
not...’
‘I’m sure they wouldn’t... unless it was something so vital, so unmissable
that they had no choice. You’d know what that would be, wouldn’t you?’
Silence.
‘What would be more important to them than you, Pontius Glaw?’
Silence.
‘Pontius?’
‘They are not caught.’
‘What? Who are not?’
‘My brethren. My kin... If you had them, you would not be asking these
questions. They are free and you are desperate.’
‘Not at all. You know how it is... so many lies, so many conflicting
stories. Your pitiful family trying to sell each other out in exchange for
freedom. I came to you for the truth.’
‘No. Credible but no.’
‘You know what it is, Pontius.’
‘No.’
‘You know what it is. They woke you from time to time to keep you
informed, woke you from the oblivion that surrounds you in that globe.
Beneath House Glaw, for example, in that chapel they built to contain you. I
saw you there. You subdued me with your power.’
‘I would do so again,’ it said, traces of fire once more flickering along
the golden filaments and woven circuits that encased the jagged, quartz-like
lump.
‘You know what it is. They told you.’
‘No.’
I reached down and grasped a sheaf of wires. ‘You’re lying,’ I said and
yanked the wires out.
A brief moan rolled from the vox-speakers and faded. The lights on the
casket went out. Air temperature and pressure began to climb again. The
frost began to dissolve.
‘Not much then,’ said Bequin.
‘We’re just beginning,’ I replied. ‘We’ve got thirty weeks.’
SEVENTEEN
Discourses.
Speculation on an unsymmetrical theme.
Betrayal.
I WENT TO the hold each day with Bequin and Aemos and we repeated the
procedure. For the next few days, he refused even to answer. After about a
week, he began to goad us and abuse us with threats and obscenities. Every
few days, he tried to lash out psychically, thwarted each time by Bequin’s
untouchable presence.
All the while, the Essene plunged through the Immaterium towards the
distant stargroup.
IN THE FOURTH week, I changed tactics, and entered into discussion with
him on any subject that occurred to me. I didn’t ask a single question
concerning the ‘true matter’. He refused to engage for the first few days,
but I remained cordial and greeted him patiently each session. At last,
discourses began: on astral navigation, high ecclesiarch music, architecture,
stellar demographics, antique weapons, fine wines...
He could not help himself. The isolation of his condition made him crave
such contacts with a real, vibrant world. He longed to taste and read and see
and live again. Within two weeks he needed no encouragement to talk. I
was no friend, and he was still wary, and keen to insult on any occasion, but
he clearly welcomed our conversations. When, deliberately, I missed a day,
he complained sullenly, as if wounded or let down.
For my part, I had the chance to realise how dangerous Glaw was. His
mind was brilliant; charming, witty, incisive, and formidably
knowledgeable. It was a pleasure to talk to him and learn from him. It was a
salutary reminder of the quality of mind that Chaos can steal. The greatest
of us, the brightest, the most urbane and learned, can fall prey.
ONE DAY IN the tenth week, I entered the chamber with Bequin and
Aemos as usual and we woke him. But an uncommon sensation troubled
me.
‘What is this?’ I said. It seemed to me the casket was not quite in the
same place as usual. ‘Have you been in here, Aemos?’ I asked. ‘Even to
make standard checks?’
‘No,’ he assured me. The hold was locked as a matter of course after
each session.
‘My imagination then,’ I decided.
OUR DISCOURSES CONTINUED, pleasantly, each morning for an hour or so.
We often discussed Imperial policies and ethics, subjects on which he was
astonishingly well-read. He never strayed, never allowed himself to profess
a belief or concept that might be deemed counter to the strictures of the
Imperium, as if he recognised that such an admission would perforce end
our entente. On occasions, I gave him openings to do so, conversational
gambits that would allow him space and opportunity to criticise or
denounce the way of the God-Emperor and the rule of Terra. He resisted,
though at times I felt he was desperate to voice his own, contrary beliefs.
But his need for activity and contact was paramount. He would not risk
losing our interaction.
He could quote, extensively, chapter and verse from Imperial texts,
philosophies, poetry, ecclesiarchal lore. His scholarship rivalled Aemos’s.
But just as he refrained from condemning himself with heretical utterances,
he also refrained from actually professing loyalty to the golden throne. He
conducted our conversations in a subjective, uninvolved way. He did not
attempt to dissemble and play the part of the loyal citizen. I appreciated that
this represented his respect for me. He did not insult my intelligence by
lying.
More often still than politics and ethics, we talked of history. Again, in
this area, his learning was tremendous, but there was also, for the first time,
an eagerness, a hunger. He never asked directly, but it was clear he longed
to know in detail about the events that had taken place in the two hundred
and twelve years since his death. His family had clearly told him little. He
made leading remarks to draw answers out of me. I gave him some, and
sometimes volunteered accounts of major events, political changes and
Imperial gains. I had decided beforehand not to make any mention of
Imperial defeats or losses, to avoid giving him anything he might relish.
The picture that Pontius Glaw got from me was of an Imperium stronger
and more healthy than ever before.
Even so, it delighted him. Precious glimpses of a galaxy he had long been
divorced from.
THE REST OF that long transit time was spent in preparation and study,
daily regimes of weapons practice and combat training. Fischig ran hand-to-
hand sessions each afternoon, and set himself to honing Bequin’s natural
dexterity and speed. I pressed weights in a makeshift gymnasium, and ran
tens of kilometres each day around the empty halls and corridors of the
Essene. Slowly, I brought myself back to peak fitness.
I worked my mind too. A disciplined regime of psychic exercises, some
conducted with Lowink’s help.
Aemos and I studied extensively. We worked through all the archive data
we had to hand, researching the saruthi. It added little to our knowledge.
The extent of their territories was known, but virtually nothing beyond that.
There had only been a handful of officially recorded contacts in the past
two thousand years. I wondered how much was known about them by the
rogue traders who sailed beyond the Imperial veil, men like Gorgone
Locke.
All we knew with any certainty was that the saruthi were an old xenos
culture – insular, secretive, lying outside the bounds of the Imperium. They
were technically resourceful, mature and well-established. We knew
nothing of their culture-type, beliefs, language... not even their physical
appearance.
‘We can at least conjecture they have some religious beliefs or values,’
Aemos told me. ‘Or, at the very least, they hold certain relics of their past in
high regard for some symbolic or sacred purpose. Our foes only excavated
that material on Damask because they knew it had value to the saruthi.’
‘Holy items? Icons?’
He shrugged. ‘Or ancestor spirits – or simply a desire to recover and
repatriate cultural materials from their past.’
‘And we know their territory was once bigger. Extending as far as
Damask, even if that was but a distant outpost,’ said Lowink.
We sat around an inlaid table in one of Maxilla’s staterooms, the polished
table top smothered in open books, scrolls, data-slates and record tiles.
‘And Bonaventure,’ I said. ‘The wheel-graves. Bequin remarked that the
site at North Qualm reminded her of those on her birthworld.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Aemos. ‘But I am no archeoxenon expert. The wheel-
graves of Bonaventure are classified as “of unknown xenos manufacture” in
all the texts I can find. They are but one among hundreds of unidentified
relic sites in the Helican sub-sector. All traces of a long-vanished, or at least
long-shrunk, saruthi civilisation... or the remnants of many miscellaneous
forerunner species that roamed this part of space before man ever came this
way.’
I set down a data-slate and picked up the item that lay in the centre of the
table, wrapped in felt. It was the single ancient tablet that had escaped
Damask with us. I had taken it from the crate during the standoff, and it had
still been in my hand when we had thrown ourselves aboard the gun-cutter.
Like the stonework dug-out in the flame hill mine, it was made of a hard
pale material glittering with flecks of mica that we all agreed was not
indigenous to Damask. And it was octagonal, but not regularly so, being
peculiarly long on two edges. The back of it was burned and scored where it
had been cut away. The reverse showed a bas-relief symbol, a five-pointed
star sigil. But it, too, was irregular: the radiating spars of the star were of
unmatched length and they protruded at a variety of angles.
‘Most perturbatory,’ said Aemos, looking at it for the umpteenth time.
‘Symmetry – at least, basic symmetry – is a virtual constant in the galaxy.
All species – even the most obscene xenos kinds like the tyranid – have
some order of it.’
‘There’s something wrong with the angles,’ agreed Lowink, furrowing
his unhealthy, socket-pocked brow. I knew what he meant. It was as if the
angles in the star symbol made up more than three hundred and sixty
degrees, though that of course was unthinkable.
‘WHO HAS BEEN in here?’ I asked at the start of my next session with
Pontius. I glanced around the frost-caked chamber. Bequin shrugged,
blowing on her hands. Aemos also looked puzzled. ‘The casket has been
moved again. Just slightly. Who has been in here?’
‘No one,’ Pontius remarked, his artificial voice colourless. ‘I was not
directing the question at you, Pontius. For I doubt you would tell me the
truth.’
‘You wound me, Gregor,’ he answered softly.
‘Are you sure it’s not your imagination?’ Aemos asked. ‘You said before
—’
‘Perhaps,’ I frowned. ‘I just feel something is... changed.’
I DINED WITH Maxilla most evenings during the long voyage, sometimes
in company with the others, sometimes alone. One evening in the twenty-
fifth week, only Maxilla and I sat at the stateroom table, as the gilt servitors
brought in our meal.
‘Tobias,’ I said at length, ‘tell me about the saruthi.’
He paused, and set his food-laden fork back down on his salver.
‘What would you have me tell you?’
‘Why you claimed to know nothing of them when I told you we were
heading into their territory.’
‘Because such places are forbidden. Because you are an inquisitor, and it
does not do to admit transgressions to one such as you.’
I toyed with the lip of my half-empty glass. ‘You have aided me eagerly
and generously up to now, Tobias. I suspected your motives at first, a detail
for which I have apologised. I see now you are as keen to serve the
Emperor of Mankind as I. It troubles me that you would withhold
information now.’
He bared his pearl-inlaid teeth and dabbed at his lips with the comer of
his napkin. ‘It does more than trouble me, Gregor. It has plagued me, a
crisis of conscience.’
‘It is time to speak then,’ I refilled both of our glasses with vintage from
the decanter. ‘Imperial knowledge of the saruthi is scant, and as you say,
forbidden. I am more than aware that rogue traders know a great deal more
about the outside systems and their species than we do. You are no rogue,
but you are of the merchant elite. I think it unlikely that you have never
come across any information pertaining to this xenos breed.’
He sighed. ‘As a young man, over ninety years ago, I travelled into
saruthi space. I was a junior crewman aboard a rogue trader called the
Promethean. The master was Vaden Awl, long dead I imagine. Now there
was a true rogue. He was sure he could strike a trading deal with these
unknowns, or at least rob them blind of treasures.’
‘And did he?’
‘No. Remember, I was junior crew. I never left the bowels of the ship, or
went to the surface of any worlds. All I knew was the miserable duration of
the voyage. The senior crewmembers were tight-lipped. It took them, as I
understand it, a long time to find the saruthi at all, and then they were less
than forthcoming. The third officer, a man I knew reasonably well, confided
to me that the saruthi played tricks on Awl’s trade envoys, hid from them,
tormented them.’
‘Tormented how?’
‘Their worlds were eerie, disarming, uncomfortable – something about
the angles, the officer said.’
‘The angles?’
He laughed sourly and shrugged. ‘As if something ill and twisted had
infected their dimensions. We came back empty-handed after a year. Many
of the crew quit and left the Promethean on our return, especially when
Awl, who was a sick and driven man by then, declared he was going back to
try again. I quit then too, but only because I couldn’t face another year
below decks.’
‘And Awl?’
‘He went back. I presume so, anyway. A few years later I heard his ship
had been taken in the Borealis Reach by eldar renegades. That’s the sum of
it. You can perhaps see why I was unwilling to tell you these things before...
because there is nothing useful to tell. Except to incriminate myself by
admitting I had gone beyond.’
I nodded. ‘In future, do not hold information back from me.’
‘I will not.’
‘And if you “remember” anything else...’
‘I will tell you at once.’
‘Tobias,’ I paused. ‘You say the voyage of the Promethean was long and
fruitless, and the crewmembers were tormented by the beings they
eventually encountered. Do you not have misgivings about returning there?’
‘Of course.’ He smiled a thin smile. ‘But I am bound to serve you as an
agent of the Emperor, and I will do so without question. Besides, part of me
is curious.’
‘Curious?’
‘I want to see these saruthi with my own eyes.’
I SHOULD MENTION the dreams.
They did not over-trouble me during the voyage, but still they lingered,
every few days or so. I seldom dreamed specifically of the blank-eyed,
handsome man, but he lurked obliquely in other dreams, a bystander,
looking on, observing, never speaking.
The lightning flashes escorted him, closer in each dream.
At ship-dawn of the third day of the twenty-ninth week, I rose silently
and left my quarters, heading down towards the hold area where Pontius
was secured. It was a good four hours until our daily conversation was due
to start.
I climbed into a service duct adjoining the hold space, and crawled down
until I reached a circulation grille looking down into the hold itself.
There was frost on the grille.
Below, a figure crouched by the casket, huddled in robes, lit only by a
hand-lamp. The overhead lights were not on.
Pontius was awake. The frost told me that much, and I could see the tiny
flashes of firing synapses and hear the low hiss of his voice.
‘Tell me of the Border Wars, the ones you mentioned last time. Imperial
losses were great, you said?’
‘I tell you much and you tell me little back,’ replied the figure. ‘That was
not our agreement. I said I would secretly help you if you helped me.
Power, Pontius, information. If you want me to act as your emissary, I need
a show of trust. How can I communicate your will to your allies, if I know
nothing of the “true matter”?’
A pause.
‘What is this about?’ the figure asked. ‘What is at stake, what thing of
great value?’
Another pause.
‘You should go before they discover you. Eisenhorn is becoming
suspicious.’
‘Tell me, Pontius. We’re nearly there, just a few days to go. Tell me so I
can help you.’
‘I... will tell you. The Necroteuch. That is what we are after, Alizabeth.’
EIGHTEEN
KCX-1288 by the light of the quill-star.
Into the Wound.
The wrongness.
ON THE FIRST day of the thirty-first week, just under a day outside
Maxilla’s estimate, the Essene burst back into realspace deep inside the
system designated KCX-1288. Almost at once we were in danger.
The local star was a vast, swollen fireball pulsing and retching out its last
few millions years of life. Distended and no longer spherical, it glowed with
a malevolent pink fire beneath a cooling crust of black shreds and tatters
that looked like rot infecting its granular skin. Firestorms swirled and
blistered across its enlarged surface and vomited gouts of stellar matter out
into the system. An immense column of excreting gas and matter plumed
away from the behemoth star, almost a light year long. It looked like a huge,
luminous quill stabbed into the soft ball of that sun.
From the moment of our arrival at the translation point, sirens and alarms
began shrilling on the bridge. External radiation levels were almost
immeasurable, and we shuddered and rocked through waves of searing star
debris. The entire system was lousy with drifting radioactive banks, ash
clouds, flares and the splinters of matter they projected, and magnetic
anomalies. Our shields were full on and already we were taking damage.
Maxilla said nothing, but furrowed his brow in concentration as he
steered the juddering ship in through the treacherous course, negotiating the
gravity pools and radioactive undertows.
‘It’s falling apart,’ said Aemos, awed, gazing at the main projection
screen and the furiously scrolling bars of data that flickered across it. ‘The
whole damn system is in a state of collapse.’
‘Any sign of them?’ I called to Maxilla.
‘We must be right on their tail. They were half a day ahead of us, no
more. Damn this interference. Wait—’
‘What?’
He said something I couldn’t hear over the cacophony.
‘Say again!’
Maxilla cancelled the screaming sirens. The juddering and shaking
continued, and now we could hear the groaning and creaking of the
Essene’s hull under stress. He pointed to the pict-plate that overviewed the
Essene’s sensor operations.
‘I’m picking up their drive-wake and gravitational displacement, but in
these conditions it’s getting really hard to read them with accuracy. There
—’ He tapped a gloved finger on the plate. ‘That’s undoubtedly a drive-
wake, but how do you explain it?’
I shook my head. I’m no mariner.
‘They’ve split,’ said Midas, looking over our shoulders. ‘The main
portion has fallen back, maybe out of the system itself to a safe distance,
and a smaller, core group has continued on in. Maybe five ships, six at
most.’
‘That’s how I read it too,’ Maxilla agreed. ‘A fleet division. I’d guess
they didn’t want to risk sending their biggest ships into this maelstrom.’
‘I can see why,’ murmured Bequin, gazing at the seething turmoil on the
main display.
‘Forget about the ones that have withdrawn. Follow the lead group in,’ I
said.
‘I would advise—’ Maxilla began.
‘Do it!’
With the aid of his navigational servitors, he adjusted the Essene’s
trajectory and set on after the drive-wake of the smaller group, driving in
system.
‘There! There, look!’ Maxilla called out suddenly, adjusting a secondary
display unit to magnify and enhance an image. It was distant, but we could
see the burst-open hulk of an Imperial cruiser drifting in a halo of slowly
dissipating energy.
‘Definitely one of Estrum’s ships. Holed by meteor storms. They ran into
trouble the moment they pressed on.’
The Essene shook again.
‘What about us?’ I asked.
Maxilla conferred with Betancore. There was a particularly violent
shudder and the main lights went out for a second.
‘We need shelter,’ Maxilla told me frankly.
As far as the Essene’s bewildered and over-taxed sensors could establish,
there were fifteen planets in the system, as well as millions of planetoid
fragments, mostly ragged embers of wasted rock and venting energy. Our
quarry’s drive wake led directly to the third largest, one of the inner worlds.
It was a scabby, ruined, semi-shattered ball with lingering swathes of
swirling bluish atmosphere. Craters covered its northern hemisphere – some
impacts had been so large that they had torn open the mantle and exposed
the livid red core beneath, like a skull cracked with devastating wounds.
Even as we watched, we saw scatters of light dot and blossom across the
surface as meteors struck and incinerated continents far below.
We tore in through the convulsing fabric of space, past moons of blood
and striated mackerel clouds of dust. A vast sheet of stellar fire swept out at
us, throwing the ship wildly off course and hurling silver lumps of rock and
ice against our shields.
‘Madness!’ cried Fischig. ‘They wouldn’t have come here! It’s death!’
Maxilla looked at me, as if hoping I’d agree with the chastener and call
us off for the sake of the Essene. ‘You are sure of their traces?’
Maxilla, his hands flexing on the controls, swallowed and nodded.
‘Get us down there, into whatever shelter the planet’s bulk can give us.
At least let’s confirm their corpses before we leave.’
DESCENT TOOK TWENTY minutes, none of them smooth and none of them
guaranteeing a sequel. I wanted to use the time to get Lowink or Maxilla’s
astropaths to check on the approach of the task force from Gudrun that had
set out, on my instructions thirty weeks ago, to rendezvous with us here.
But it was impossible. The stellar distortion rendered astrotelepathy
blind.
I cursed.
We went in steeply, down towards the dark side of the wounded planet.
Blooms of fire consumed crater-pocked landmasses in the darkness below
and ammoniacal storms raged in oceanic measures. Even here, with the
planet between us and the convulsing sun, the ride was hard and rough. We
saw, for a second as we passed, another ship ruin, another of Estrum’s fleet
splintered and destroyed. A death world; a death system.
‘Our enemies must have made a mistake,’ said Aemos, holding on to the
edge of a console to steady himself. ‘The saruthi can’t be here. If they ever
inhabited this system, they must have long since abandoned it.’
‘Yet,’ I countered, ‘the heretic fleet’s advance group presses on with great
determination and purpose.’
The Essene continued to descend, closer than it would normally come to
a planetary body. Only ribbons of atmosphere remained, and Maxilla clung
to the ragged surface, passing barely ten kilometres above the bare rock.
Drizzles of shooting stars rained past us.
‘What’s that?’ I asked.
Maxilla adjusted his sensors and the resolution of the display. A huge
wound in the planet’s crust yawned before us, a thousand kilometres wide; a
cliff-like lip of impact-raised rock with a vast cavity beneath.
‘The sensors can’t resolve it. Is that meteor damage?’
‘Perhaps, from an angled strike,’ said Aemos.
‘Did they go past or in?’ I asked.
‘In?’ barked Maxilla, incredulously.
‘In! Did they go in?’
Aemos was leaning over the servitor at the sensor station. ‘The drive
wake ebbs and disappears here. Either they were vaporised en masse at this
point or they indeed went inside.’
I looked at Maxilla. The Essene bucked again, thrown by a gravity pool,
and the bridge lights went out briefly for a second time.
‘This is a star-going ship,’ he said softly, ‘not built for surface landing.’
‘I know that,’ I replied. ‘But neither were theirs. They have more
information than we do... and they have gone inside.’
Shaking his head, Maxilla turned the Essene down towards the vast
wound.
THE RIFT CAVITY was dark, and limitless according to the sensors, though
in my opinion, the sensors were no better than useless now. A dull red glow
suffused the darkness far below us. The violent shaking had stopped, but
still the hull creaked and protested at the gravitational stress.
We had the sudden impression of moving through some structure, then
another, then a third. The display revealed the fourth before we passed
under it: an angular hoop or arch eighty kilometres across. Beyond it, more
in the series, towering around us as we progressed, as if we were passing
down the middle of a giant rib-cage.
‘They’re octagonal,’ said Aemos.
‘And irregular,’ I added.
No two of the rib-arches were the same, but they displayed the same
form and lack of symmetry as their companions – the shape we now
instantly associated with the saruthi.
‘These can’t be natural,’ said Maxilla.
We continued in under the cyclopean spans, passing through a dozen,
then a dozen more.
‘Light sources ahead,’ a servitor announced.
A dull, greenish glow fogged into being far away down the avenue of
octagonal arches.
‘Do we continue?’ asked Maxilla.
I nodded. ‘Send a marker drone back to the surface.’
A moment later, the rear display showed a small servitor drone straggling
back up the vast channel towards the surface, running lights winking.
We ran on past the last arch. There was another judder.
Then we were riding clear into light, smooth, pale, green light.
There seemed to be no roof or ceiling to whatever we were in, though
inside the planetary cavity we undoubtedly were. Just hazy green light, and
below, a carpet of wispy cloud.
All turbulence stopped. We were like a ship becalmed.
THE ATMOSPHERE in this place – logic battled to make us remember we
were inside the crust of a planet – was thin and inert, a vaguely ammoniacal
vapour. None of us could explain the source of the pervasive luminescence
or the fact that the Essene sat comfortably at grav anchor in the serene
quiet. As Maxilla had pointed out, it was not a trans-atmospheric vessel and
it should have been impossible to stabilise it this close to a planetary body
without severe stress damage.
From its system registers, the Essene seemed happy enough, happy to
have ridden out the vile stellar storms of KCX-1288 into this safe harbour.
Apart from minor impact damage, only two of the ship’s systems were
inoperative. The sensors were blind and giving back nothing but odd, dead
echoes. And every chronometer on the ship had stopped, except two that
were running backwards.
Betancore and Maxilla studied the imperfect returns of the sensor arrays
and concluded land of some sort lay beneath us, under the cloudbank. We
estimated that it was six kilometres straight down, though in this vague,
hazy rift it was difficult to say.
If Glaw’s heretics were here, they had left no trace. But with our sensors
so badly occluded, their advance fleet could be anchored just on the other
side of the clouds.
WE DROPPED TO the cloudbank from the Essene in the gun-cutter shortly
afterwards. All of us had buckled on hard-armour vacuum suits from
Maxilla’s lockers. Lowink, Fischig, Aemos and I shambled about the crew
bay, getting used to the heavy plate and bulky quilting of the suits.
Bequin was in the cockpit with Betancore, watching him take us down.
The pair of them wore borrowed vacuum suits too, and she was pinning up
her hair so it would not interfere with the helmet seal.
‘Good hunting, inquisitor,’ crackled Maxilla from the Essene above us.
‘He’ll be down there, won’t he?’ asked Bequin, and I knew she was
referring to Mandragore.
‘It’s likely. Him... and whatever this is all about.’
‘Well, you heard what Pontius said,’ she replied.
How could I not have? The Necroteuch. One doesn’t hear a word like
that and forget it. It had taken her weeks to gain the confidence of our
bodiless prisoner, to play the part of a disaffected traitor. I hadn’t been sure
she was up to it, but she had performed with patience and a finely gauged
measure of play-acting. It had been a risk, letting her slip in to see Pontius
alone. She had assured me she could do it and she had not been wrong.
The Necroteuch. If Pontius Glaw was telling the truth, our enterprise had
even greater urgency now. I had wondered what could be so precious, so
important as to galvanise our enemies so, make them risk so much. I had
my answer. Legend said the last extant copy of that abominable work had
been destroyed millennia before. Except that by some means, in antique
ages past, a copy had come into the hands of the saruthi race. And now they
were preparing to trade it back to Glaw’s Imperial heretics.
WE CAME DOWN through the clouds and saw the land below, a wide,
rolling expanse of dust sweeping down to what seemed to be a sea. Liquid
frothed and broke along a curved shoreline a hundred kilometres long.
Everything was a shade of pale green, bathed by the radiance that glowed
through the wispy clouds. There was a misty softness to it all, a lack of
sharp focus. It seemed endless, toneless, slow. There was a calm, ethereal
feel that was at once soothing and unnerving. Even the lapping sea seemed
languid. It reminded me of the seacoast at Tralito, on Caelun Two, where I
had spent a summer recuperating from injuries years before. Endless
leagues of mica dunes, the slow sea, the balmy, hazy air.
‘How big?’ I asked Midas.
‘Is what?’ he asked.
‘This... place.’
He pointed to the instruments. ‘Can’t say. A hundred kilometres, two...
three... a thousand.’
‘You must have something!’
He looked round at me with a smile that had worry in it. ‘Systems say it’s
endless. Which is, of course, impossible. So I think the instruments are out.
I’m not trusting them, anyway.’
‘Then what are you flying by?’
‘My eye – or the seat of my pants. Whichever you find most reassuring.’
We followed the slow curve of the endless bay for about ten minutes. At
last, details emerged to break up the uniform anonymity.
A row of arches, octagonal, jutting from the sand a few hundred metres
back from the waterline, ran parallel to the water. They were each about
fifty metres broad, in everything but scale the twins of the arches Maxilla
had guided the Essene through. They extended away as far as we could see
in the green haze.
‘Set us down.’
WE SAT THE gun-cutter on the soft dusty-sand half a kilometre from the
shore, clamped on our helmets and ventured out.
The radiance was greater than I had expected – the cutter’s ports had
been tinted – and we slid down brown-glass over-visors against the glare.
I hate vacuum suits. The sense of being muffled and constrained, the
ponderous movement, the sound of my own breath in my ears, the sporadic
click of the intercom. The suit shut out all sounds from outside, except the
crunch of my feet on the fine, dry sand.
We shuffled down to the water’s edge in a wide file. All of us except
Aemos carried weapons.
It looked like a sea. Green water, showing white at the breakers.
‘Liquid ammonia,’ Aemos said, his voice a low crackle over the vox.
There was something strange about it.
‘Do you see it?’ he asked me.
‘What?’
‘The waves are moving out from the shore.’
I looked again. It was so obvious, I had missed it. The liquid wasn’t
rushing in and breaking, it was sucking away from the shore and rolling
back into itself.
It was chilling. So simple. So wrong. My confidence withered. I wanted
to strip off the claustrophobic suit and cry out. And I would have, except for
the stark red warning lights on the atmosphere reader built into my suit’s
bulky left cuff.
What was it Maxilla had said? The saruthi had tormented the men of the
Promethean? I didn’t know for a moment if the unnatural behaviour of the
sea was their doing – how could it have been? But I understood how
insidious, distressing torment might have played upon them.
Fischig and Betancore had approached the first of the arches. I looked
across and saw them dwarfed by the unsymmetrical structure. The next in
the line was three hundred metres away, and they seemed regularly spaced.
Each one, as far as I could see, was irregular in a different way, though the
size and proportions were identical.
Bequin was kneeling on the shoreline, brushing the sand aside gently
with her gauntlet. She had found what was perhaps the most distressing
detail so far.
Under the sand, a few centimetres down, the ground was tiled.
Tessellated, irregular octagonal tiles, just like the ones she had found on the
floor of the mine working at North Qualm. Once more, they fitted perfectly,
impossibly, despite their shape.
The more of them she uncovered, the more she brushed the sand away.
‘Stop it,’ I said. ‘For our sanity, I don’t think it’s worth trying to discover
if they cover the entire beach.’
‘Can all of this... be artificial?’ she asked.
‘It can’t be,’ said Aemos. ‘Perhaps the tiles and the arches are part of
some old structure, long abandoned, that has since been flooded and
covered with the dust... due to... to...’
He didn’t sound at all convincing.
I crossed to Fischig and Betancore and stood with them gazing up at the
first arch. It was wrought from that odd, unknown metal we had seen on
Damask.
‘What do we do know?’ Fischig asked.
‘Well, I hate to state the obvious,’ said Aemos from down the beach, ‘but
the last row of these we found formed a deliberate pathway that led the
Essene in here. Should we assume this serves the same purpose?’
I stepped forward, through the broad, towering shape of the first arch.
‘Come on,’ I said.
WE WALKED FOR what I estimated was perhaps twenty minutes.
Estimated. All of our chronometers were dead. After the first few minutes
we began to hear a distant, repetitive boom; a low, almost sub-sonic peal
like thunder that rolled out from somewhere far away over the sea. Or
seemed to. It came every half minute or so. There were long intervals of
silence, and just when we’d thought we’d heard the last, another boom
would come. Like the crunch of our own footsteps, we could hear it through
the suits, even with our vox circuits switched off.
I voxed to Maxilla. ‘Can you hear that?’
There was a crackle, and no immediate reply. Then a sudden burst of
transmission. Maxilla’s voice: ‘...as you instruct, Gregor, but it’s not going
to be easy. Say again... what did you say about Fischig?’
‘Maxilla! Repeat!’ I began, but his voice continued over the top,
incoherent. It wasn’t a reply. I was just picking up his voice. I felt my spine
go cold.
More static.
‘Tell Alizabeth, I agree with that! Ha!’
It went dead.
I looked back at the others. Their pale faces gazed out of the tinted brown
faceplates like ghosts.
‘What... was that?’ I murmured.
‘An echo?’ Aemos whispered. ‘Some kind of transmission anomaly
caused by the atmosphere and the—’
‘It’s not a conversation I’ve ever had.’
Another boom of thunder rolled across the dry, softly lit shore.
AFTER MY ESTIMATED twenty minutes, we passed through what was
suddenly the last arch. We all stopped. Ahead of us, the land rose more
steeply, into hills and low ridges. The terrain there was darker, inhospitable.
The overall radiance had dulled, and the sky was a deep green, oozing into
blackness over the hills. ‘There... there were more in the row!’ Fischig
exclaimed. ‘More arches!’ He was right. The octagonal colonnade had
disappeared as we passed through the last arch. I stepped back through,
imagining perhaps that from the other side the arches might reappear. They
didn’t. The booming continued. We set off towards the hills. Bursts of static
hissed through our vox units. ‘Transmissions,’ said Lowink. He fiddled
with his vox-channels. ‘I can’t tune them in, but they’re chatter. Military.
Back and forth.’ Our quarry, perhaps.
‘Look!’ said Betancore, pointing behind us. Beyond the shore and the
retreating line of arches, three ominous dark shapes hung under the clouds,
out over the sea. Two Imperial frigates and an old, non-standard
merchantman, floating at grav-anchor. ‘How did we not see them when we
passed?’
‘I don’t know, Midas. I’m not sure of anything anymore.’ When I turned
back to the rest of the group, I saw Aemos unclasping his helmet.
‘Aemos!’
‘Calm yourself,’ he said, uncovering his wizened old head. With the wide
locking collar of the suit around him, he looked like a tortoise, pushing its
gnarled head from its shell. He raised his left arm and showed me the
atmosphere reader. The lights were green.
‘Human-perfect atmosphere,’ he said. ‘A little cold and sterile, but
human-perfect.’
We all unclasped our helmets and pulled them off. The chilly air bit my
face, but it was good to be free of the suits. There was no scent to the air,
none at all. Not salt or ammonia or dust.
We helped each other fasten our helmets to our shoulder packs. The
booming was duller and more distant now it didn’t have our hollow helmets
to resonate through. We could hear each other’s footsteps, each other’s
breathing, the suck and lap of the ocean. I could suddenly smell Bequin’s
perfume. It was reassuring.
I led the group on, and we climbed slowly into the rising land. Now free
of the helmet, I understood our ponderous progress was a result of more
than our heavy suits. It was somehow difficult to gauge distance and depth.
We stumbled every now and then. The whole place was profoundly wrong.
WE CAME UPON them very suddenly. The sudden resumption of the vox-
traffic was our only warning. Our speakers burst into life simultaneously.
‘Run! Move up! Segment two!’
‘Where are you? Where are you?’
‘Cover to the left! That’s an order! Cover to the left!’
‘They’re behind me! They’re behind me and I c—’
A fierce hiss of static.
Ahead, coming down the ridges and slopes of the dark rise, we saw
soldiers. Imperial Guard, wearing red and gold combat armour. Gudrunite
riflemen.
‘Cover!’ I ordered, and we dropped down into the shelter of the rising
dunes, readying weapons.
There were sixty or more of them, hurrying down the upper slopes
towards us in a wide straggle, running. There was no order to it. They were
fleeing. An officer in their midst was waving his arms and shouting, but
they were ignoring him. Many had lost helmets or rifles.
A second later, their pursuers came over the rise and fell upon them from
behind. Three black, armoured speeders in the livery of navy security, and a
following line of thirty troopers in their distinctive black armour, ordered,
disciplined, marching in a spaced line, firing their hell-guns into the backs
of the fleeing conscripts. The landspeeders swept in low, drizzling the
slopes with cannon fire. The shots threw up plumes of dust, and the
mangled bodies of men. A second later and all three land-speeders passed
over us at what seemed like head-height, overshooting across the ammonia
sea and banking round to follow in on another pass.
Some of the Gudrunites were firing back, and I saw one trooper topple
and fall. But there was no co-ordination, no control.
‘What the hell! Do we stay hidden?’ gasped Bequin.
‘They’ll see us soon enough,’ said Fischig, sliding open the feed slit of
his heavy stubber’s box magazine.
The odds were terrible, and ever since the incident on the Essene, I’d had
a morbid loathing of the black-clad troopers.
But still...
I pulled out my heavy autopistol and tossed it to Aemos, freeing my las-
carbine from the fastener lugs on my pack. Bequin drew her own weapons,
a pair of laspistols. Lowink and Midas had their firearms – a las-carbine and
a Glavian needle-rifle respectively – already braced in their hands.
‘Look to the troops,’ I told Fischig, Lowink and Bequin. ‘Do what you
can, Aemos. Midas – the fliers are down to us.’
We bellied forward through the dunes, and then came up firing. Fischig’s
big gun smashed into the lip of the high ridge, kicking up dust, before he
found range and demolished three of the stalking troopers.
Lowink’s carbine cracked out, and Aemos fired the autopistol hesitantly.
Bequin was amazing. She’d used her time well during the thirty-week
passage, and Midas had clearly instructed her carefully. A laspistol in each
hand, she whooped out a battle-cry of sorts and placed careful shots that
dropped two more of the troopers.
The troopers balked in their ruthless advance, realising the situation had
suddenly changed. The scattering Gudrunites also wavered, and some of
them, the officer included, turned and began to confront the killers. I had
been counting on this. We couldn’t take them alone. I had trusted that our
sudden intervention might galvanise the guardsmen.
Still, many ran.
A fierce firelight erupted along the ridge between the halted troopers and
those Gudrunites below who were turning to fight. Lowink. Fischig, Aemos
and Bequin moved forward in support.
The landspeeders swept back, hammering the shore with shells.
Betancore dropped to one knee, raised his exotic weapon and fired. The
long barrel pulsed and made a sound like a whispered shriek. Explosive
splinters tore through the nearest speeder as it crossed down over us and it
blew apart in the air.
Burning wreckage scattered across the sand.
I chased a second with my carbine. It was turning to present on us, and
the turn made it slow. My shots missed or deflected from the armour. As its
heavy cannon began to fire, pulverising the sand in a stitching row towards
me, I shot the pilot through the face plate.
Still firing, it plunged suddenly and hit the beach fifty metres behind me.
It bounced, shredding apart, struck again and crashed into the breakers in a
spray of debris that threw up thousands of mismatched splashes.
The third speeder turned in and made another pass, killing six more of
the fleeing Gudrunites, who presented easy targets on the sand. Midas had
his weapon trained on it and fired as it passed over, missing. He fired again,
striking its rear end as it burned away.
It kept going. Over the beach. Out to sea. I have no idea what he hit – the
crew, the control systems – but it just kept going, on and on, until it
disappeared from sight.
We pressed up the slope, in among the Gudrunites now. They were dirty
and dishevelled to a man, none older than twenty-five. Seeing us and the
damage we had wrought, they cheered, perhaps imagining we were part of
some greater rescue force.
On the upper ridge, the last few troopers were crumpling. Fischig
charged them, his stubber wailing, and a dozen Gudrunites went with him,
eager to turn on their tormentors.
The ridge fight lasted another two minutes. Fischig lost two of the
Gudrunites with him, but made certain none of the troopers survived. Law
enforcement, I remember thinking, had robbed the military of a fine soldier
in Chastener Fischig.
I sought out the Gudrunite officer as his men collapsed, weary with
exhaustion and relief. Some were weeping. All of them looked scared.
Smoke from the battle drifted down the ridge in the windless air.
The officer, a sergeant, was no older than his men. He had attempted to
grow a beard, but his facial hair wasn’t really up to it. He saluted me even
before I had shown him my badge of office. Then he fell on his knees.
‘Get up.’
He did.
‘Inquisitor Eisenhorn. And you are...?’
‘Sergeant Enil Jeruss, second battalion, 50th Gudrunite Rifles. Sir, is the
fleet here? Have they found us?’
I held up my hand to quieten him down.
‘Appraise me, quickly and briefly.’
‘We wanted no part of it. We were mustered to the frigate Exalted,
waiting to ship out. When we ran from Gudrun high anchor, the captain told
us all Gudrun had fallen and we were relocating.’
‘The captain?’
‘Captain Estrum, sir.’
‘And then?’
‘Thirty weeks in transit to get here. The moment we arrived, we knew
something was wrong. We protested, demanded to know what was
happening. They called it dereliction and sent dozens to the firing squads.
We were given a chance to follow orders or die.’
‘Not much of a chance.’
He shook his head. ‘No, sir. That’s why I tried to get the men out. We
broke and ran, once we’d got in there, once they were busy. They came
after us to hunt us down.’
‘In where?’
He gestured back over the ridge. ‘The darkness.’
‘Tell me what you saw,’ I said.
NINETEEN
Jeruss makes his report.
At the plateau.
The true matter.
‘I DON’T EVEN know what world we’re on,’ Sergeant Jeruss said. They
never told us. The ride in was rough, though.’
‘It has no name, as far as I know. Go on.’
‘They deployed us from the ships along this beach as an escort detail for
the main party.’
‘How many men?’
‘Over a hundred naval security troopers, and three hundred or so of us
guard.’
‘Vehicles?’
‘Speeders like you saw, and a pair of heavier personnel carriers for some
crates of cargo and the main party.’
‘What do you know of them?’
Jeruss shrugged. ‘Of the cargo, nothing. In the main party was the
captain, and Lord Glaw of Gudrun. He’s a worthy nobleman from my
homeworld.’
‘I know him. Who else?’
‘Some others too: a merchant, an ecclesiarch, and a great and terrible
warrior that they tried to keep away from us regular troops.’
Mandragore, no doubt. And Dazzo and Locke. The core of Oberon
Glaw’s cabal.
‘Then what?’
Jeruss pointed up the slopes in the dark, forbidding uplands. ‘We
advanced into that. It seemed to me they knew where they were going.
Things changed as we went further in. It got darker and warmer. And it was
hard to negotiate the way, as if—’
‘As if what?’
‘We couldn’t judge distances. Sometimes it was like wading through hot
wax, sometimes we could barely slow ourselves down. Some of the men
panicked. We found polygons, like these on the beach.’
It was his word for the hoop-like arches.
‘There were rows of them, aisles, marching away into the uplands. They
were so irregular they disturbed the mind. They seemed to vary, to change.’
‘What do you mean “irregular”?’
‘I went to no officer school, sir, but I am educated. I understand simple
geometry. The angles of the polygons did not add up, yet they were there.’
Chilled, I recalled Maxilla’s mention of the ‘unwholesome’ angles, and
thought too of the marking on the tile I had taken from Damask.
‘We followed some of these rows, passing through polygons on
occasions. The ecclesiarch and the merchant seemed to be leading us. And
there was another man, a tech-priest type.’
‘Slim build? Blue eyes?’
‘Yes.’
‘His name is Malahite. He played a part in choosing your path?’
‘Yes, they deferred to him on several occasions. Finally, we came to a
plateau. A great raised, wide space, overlooked by jagged peaks of rock.
The plateau was artificial. Tiled with smooth stones that—’
He tried to make a shape with his index fingers and thumbs but .
shrugged and gave up.
‘More impossible polygons?’
He laughed nervously. ‘Yes. The plateau was vast. We waited there, the
men grouped around the outside of the space, the main party and the
vehicles in the centre.’
‘And then?’
‘We waited what seemed like hours, but it was impossible to tell because
our chronometers had all stopped. Then there was some kind of dispute.
Lord Glaw was arguing with some of the others. I saw this as a chance. I
got the men ready. Nearly ninety of us, ready and eager to trust to chance
and flee. All eyes were on the shouting match. The big warrior – God-
Emperor save me! – he was shouting by then. I think the sound of his voice
was what decided us. We slipped away in twos and threes, from the back of
the ranks, down the sides of the plateau, and ran back the way we’d come.’
‘And they discovered your escape?’
‘Eventually. And came hunting for us. The rest you know.’
I waited a few moments for him to collect himself, and gathered the men
around. There were about thirty riflemen left, all of them scared, and
another three or four wounded. Aemos did what he could for them.
I rose and addressed them all. ‘In defying your officers and leaders, you
have served the Emperor. The men who brought you here are Imperial
heretics, and their enterprise is criminal. My purpose here is to stop them. I
intend to press on at once on that mission. I cannot vouch for the safety of
any who follow me, but I count it as a mark of honour to the Emperor
himself that you will. He needs our service here, now. If you take seriously
the oaths you made to the Imperium when you became guardsmen, then you
will not hesitate. There is no more vital battle in which you might give your
lives.’
Wild, frightened faces stared back at me. There was a murmur of
agreement, but these were young inexperienced men, some no more than
boys, who had been thrown into the deep waters of madness.
‘Steel yourselves, and know that the Emperor is with you and for you in
this. I don’t exaggerate when I say the future rests in our hands.’
More voluble assent now. These men weren’t cowards. They just needed
a purpose and a sense that they were fighting for a worthy cause.
I whispered briefly to Fischig and he immediately stepped up and raised
his voice to the Imperial creed, and the song of allegiance, hymns that every
child in the Imperium knew. The Gudrunites joined in lustily. It centred and
focused their determination.
Still, the booming came along the shore.
With Betancore’s help, I stripped arms and equipment from the fallen.
There were enough weapons to make sure every man had a lasrifle or a
hell-gun. We also managed to assemble three intact naval trooper uniforms,
mixing and matching from the dead.
I stripped off my bulky vacuum suit and began to put on the polished
black combat armour of a naval security trooper. Midas attempted to do the
same, but his build was too slim for the heavy rig. The troopers were, to a
man, large brutes.
We dressed Fischig in the armour instead, and then, so as not to waste the
third set, chose a heavy-set Gudrunite from Jeruss’s group, a corporal
named Twane.
‘What’s the Gudrunite command channel?’ I asked Jeruss as I adjusted
the helmet vox set.
‘Beta-phi-beta.’
‘And of the men you left in there at the plateau, how many others might
side with us?’
‘All the Gudrunites, I would say. Sergeant Creddon’s unit, certainly.’
‘Your job will be to rally them to us when we get inside. I’ll give the
word.’
He nodded.
We left the wounded on the shore, as comfortable as we could make
them, and advanced into the dark uplands.
AS JERUSS HAD told me, it quickly became darker and warmer. The sleek
black body armour I was now wearing had an integral cooling system, but it
didn’t seem to help. And the wrongness still afflicted us. It was difficult to
walk without stumbling in places.
We came upon the first of the arches, and Jeruss led us through, though
we would have been able to follow the course without difficulty. Footsteps
and the tracks of heavy vehicles had left deep prints and ruts in the soft
dusty soil.
We were advancing up a cluster of hills, dark and uninviting with a
glowering sky above. There were many-rows of arches, some overlapping.
We became disoriented. It seemed on occasions that as we passed through
one arch, we came out through another in a different row. The tracks never
wavered or broke, but we seemed to blink between one aisle of hoops and
another. And the angles of the joints in the arches were – as Jeruss had said
– geometrically incorrect.
‘I think,’ Aemos said quietly to me as we walked onwards, ‘the lack of
symmetry is in every particular and every dimension.’
‘Meaning?’
‘The three we can see and the fourth – time. Dimensions have been
stretched and warped. Perhaps accidentally. Perhaps to torment us. Perhaps
for some other purpose. But I think that is why things are so twisted and
wrong.’
WE CAME AT last upon the place Jeruss had called the plateau. It was a
flat-topped mound nearly a kilometre across, smoothly tiled with octagonal
tesserae that mocked logic. The sides sloped down to the dusty soil and all
around, the site was ringed by ragged brown peaks and crags. Above, the
sky was dark and flecked with stars.
On our side of the plateau, a semi-circle of several hundred men sat
huddled around the rim, waiting. I could feel their tension. More than half
of them were Gudrunites; the others were troopers. Smaller groups of
soldiers stood in ordered ranks further towards the centre of the plateau,
escorting two navy troop carriers in which figures sat, and a pair of empty
landspeeders. A pile of crates had been removed from the carriers and piled
on the tiled ground.
On the far side of the plateau, a row of arches led away into the
surrounding rocks.
We lay in cover and waited, watching.
AFTER AN INTERMINABLE period, there was movement on the far side and
figures emerged from the arches. Even at a distance, I could tell they were
Dazzo and Malahite, with four naval troopers in escort. They came out
briskly, signalling to the main group at the vehicles. All the troops around
the rim got to their feet.
Other shapes now appeared through the arches. They were impossible to
define at first; grey, reflective shapes that had no human form or intelligible
movement.
I took out my scope, and trained it on them, carefully resolving the
magnification.
And I saw the saruthi for the first time.
There were nine of them, as far as I could tell. They made me think of
arachnids, or crustaceans, but neither comparison was entirely accurate.
From their flat, grey bodies extended five supporting limbs, jointed in such
a way so that the main mid-limb joint was raised higher than the horizontal
torso. There was no symmetry to the arrangement of limbs, or to the way in
which they moved. Their scuttling pace was irregular and without repetition
of order. It was disturbing merely to watch them walk. Each limb ended in a
calliper of polished silver, a metal stilt clasped in the digits of each limb,
lifting them a further metre or so off the ground. The metal spikes of the
stilts made a clacking, tapping sound on the hard tiles that I could hear
despite the distance. Their heads were oblate shapes rising on thick,
boneless columns from the tops of their bodies. They had long skulls and
lacked obvious mouths or eyes, though several flaring, nostril-like openings
showed on their snouts. There was no symmetry to the arrangement of these
openings either, nor to the shape of the skulls, and their necks sprouted off-
centre from their backs.
They were loathsome, filthy things. Each creature was twice the mass of
a man, with gleaming grey flesh.
Shouts and noises of alarm came from some of the waiting men. Several
turned and fled from the plateau, scrabbling, wailing.
The nine saruthi clicked their way out into the open from the hoop,
fanning out until they formed a semi-circular line facing Dazzo and
Malahite. I saw Oberon Glaw, Gorgone Locke, Estrum and the monstrous
form of Mandragore descend from the vehicles to join their comrades.
I confess that I was, by then, as afraid as those with me. I have seen
horror, and horror itself does not terrify me. Nor indeed was there anything
horrific about these beings. Alien, yes, and as a puritan that was alarming.
But objectively, they were impressive, striking creatures; assured, almost
majestic.
My fear stemmed from a deeper, gut instinct. As with this world we had
entered, there was a wrongness to them, to their shape, their movement,
their design. Each scuttling limb, each swaying head, betrayed an unholy
nature. I could not have believed how reassuring symmetry could be, and
how distressing might be its lack. They were warped things, warped from
any civilised sense of grace, any human understanding of aesthetics. Their
bodies and limbs were so irregular, they didn’t even seem to make sense as
if, like the tiles and the arches, their angles didn’t add up correctly.
Fear, then, swayed me. I looked around at my companions, and saw fear
on their gazing faces too; fear, revulsion, disbelief.
Aemos saved my life and sanity. He and he alone stared in wonder at the
saruthi, a perplexed smile of intellectual delight on his ancient face.
‘Most perturbatory,’ I heard him murmur.
That simple detail made me laugh. My confidence returned, and with it,
my resolve. I waved Fischig and the soldier, Twane, over to me, and then
made certain that Bequin, Midas and Jeruss were sufficiently in control of
their faculties to be left in charge. Jeruss and Twane needed some fierce
cajoling. Bequin was already prepared, her weapons drawn. The sight of
Mandragore had fired her will.
‘Wait for my signal,’ I told Midas. To Fischig I said, ‘Keep an eye on our
friend here,’ meaning Twane.
The three of us crept down from cover and approached the edge of the
plateau. The men were all on their feet, murmuring, alarmed, looking at the
meeting taking place at the centre of the platform. Naval security officers
scolded the Gudrunites and kept them in line, but I could tell they were
uneasy too.
We came up the slope and melted into the watching crowd. Gudrunites
got out of our way – three more naval oppressors with blank visors and
low-strapped hell-guns.
We came almost to the front of the crowd. A trooper near me growled, ‘I
didn’t sign up for this!’ as he stared at the saruthi two hundred metres away.
‘Pull yourself together!’ I snapped to him and he looked at me sharply.
‘It isn’t right!’ he murmured.
‘We’ll see, won’t we?’ I said, patting my hell-gun. ‘If Estrum and these
others have led us into a nightmare, they’ll see how Scarus Fleet’s troopers
account for themselves!’
He nodded and readied his own weapon.
Twane, Fischig and I moved forward again. No one paid us any heed.
Indeed, many troopers were moving forward to flank the vehicles now.
I looked again at the meeting. Oberon Glaw, his long robes spilling down
from upraised arms, was greeting the saruthi with words I couldn’t hear. It
went on a while.
Finally, he half turned and gestured towards the waiting crates. His voice
reached me.
‘And in good faith we have brought the properties as agreed.’
Locke moved back from the group. ‘Attend me!’ he ordered to the naval
troopers around him. I moved forward at once, and so did Fischig. In a
second, we were part of a team of more than a dozen troopers carrying the
first of the crates forward. I was right next to Locke, my black-gloved hands
clutching the carrying handle next to his brawny fists.
We set the crates down in front of the saruthi and withdrew a few paces.
Locke remained and opened a crate lid as one of the saruthi clattered
forward.
I saw them now, close to. It was no better. Their grey skin was covered
with whorled pores, and the nostrils on their snouts flared and clenched. I
could see that each of their limbs ended in what looked abominably like a
human hand, grey skinned, gripping the cross-bar of each silver stilt.
The saruthi that had moved forward set two of his stilts down on the tiles
and reached into the open crate with flickering fingers. It searched by touch
for a moment, and then withdrew its hands empty. Its eyeless skull swayed
slightly on its neck. Then it raised those free hands high, clasped together,
as a man might raise his hands over his head in victory.
The long, rubber-jointed fingers of each hand – and I cannot say for sure
how many digits each hand had or even if they each had the same number –
twisted and clenched around each other and formed a shape. A visage. A
human face. Eyes, a nose, a wide mouth. Perfect, impossible, chilling.
The raised effigy of a face seemed to study us. Then the mouth moved.
‘Your bond you have with truth made, being man.’
There was a hush of alarm in the crowd at my back. The voice was dull
and tuneless, without inflection, but the finger-mouth puppeted the speech
with awful precision.
‘Then we may trade?’ Glaw stammered.
The hands parted and the face vanished. The creature took up its stilts
again and scuttled backwards. Its kin also moved back, away from the arch.
More creatures emerged, more saruthi identical to those who had already
appeared, flanking other things. There seemed to be four of them, with body
structures similar to the aliens, but they were bloated and misshapen. Their
rugose flesh was white and sickly and blotched with marks that seemed like
disease. Instead of stilts, their limbs were fitted with heavy, metal hooves,
linked all around by wires that acted like shackles. These pallid, wretched
things – slaves of the saruthi I had no doubt – moaned as they moved,
filling the air with a sickly whining. The waiting saruthi jabbed at them
with the points of their stilts as they clattered past onto the plateau.
Between them, on their backs, the four slave-things carried a trapezoidal
casket of black metal, covered with irregularly spaced wart-like
protuberances. They came to a halt and sank down onto their bellies.
Dazzo and Malahite moved forward, approaching the casket bearers. A
stilted saruthi scuttled around beside them, reached a long limb over to
extend his silver calliper, and pressed the point against one of the
protuberances.
The casket opened on invisible hinges, like the petals of a malformed
flower. I think I had expected light to radiate out, or some other show of
power.
There was none. Malahite stepped forward between the kneeling limbs of
the slave-things and reached out, but Dazzo pushed him back with a curse
and a slap of psychic power that sent him sprawling.
A ripple of response ran through the saruthi, making them scuttle on the
spot.
Now Dazzo reached into the casket. He took out a tiny oblong, no bigger
than a boltgun’s magazine, and held it in trembling hands, gazing at it.
A book. Ancient parchment encased in a sleeve of black saruthi metal,
closed with a clasp.
‘Well, ecclesiarch?’ Glaw growled. ‘We need confirmation.’
Dazzo unclasped the cover and turned the first antique page.
‘The true matter is ours,’ he stammered, and fell to his knees. The
Necroteuch. They had the Necroteuch. It was now or never, I thought.
TWENTY
My ally, confusion.
The wrath of Mandragore.
Against Oberon.
I BELLOWED, ‘Look out! They’re attacking!’ and slammed myself hard
into the two troopers by my side. As we went over in a clumsy, thrashing
heap, I fired my hell-gun wildly for good measure.
Tension among the humans gathered around the plateau was intense. The
saruthi, I firmly believe, had deliberately used their devices and
environment to foment that tension, perhaps intending to weaken and cow
the humans they found themselves dealing with. If so, they had done too
good a job. Gudrunites and troopers alike were at snapping point, their
minds and spirits rattled by their location and by what they had seen. A
warning voice and a few shots was all it took to spill the tension over.
All around me, men yelled out and weapons crackled. Assuming an
attack on their high-born leaders, the troopers still firmly loyal to Glaw and
Estrum surged forward, firing on the saruthi with their assault guns. Others
wavered in confusion and lashed out at those around them. The Gudrunites
around the rim of the plateau turned their guns on their oppressors, or fired
at the vehicles.
From the rim of the plateau, Midas and Bequin led our rearguard in a
charge, weapons blazing.
In a second, the air was full of shouts and screams, gunfire and skittering
las-bolts. Total confusion reigned.
I could hear Jeruss on the guard vox channel rallying his comrades,
calling for them to turn on the navy personnel. The naval security combat
channel was riven with orders and countermands, squeals of rage and
bellowed curses. I heard Oberon Glaw screaming for order, and the baying
howl of Mandragore behind it all.
‘Fischig! Twane! Sow confusion! Make for the target!’
Disguised like me, the pair moved forward. The mayhem was too dense
and frenzied for there to be any sense of opposing sides. Guards fought
naval troopers, or even each other, and indiscriminate fire whipped in all
directions.
I shot down a trooper who ran past me, and another nearby who turned in
dismay. Past them, I saw the tall, spare form of the rogue captain, Estrum,
gazing at me through the smoke wash with incredulity. His eyes bulged
more than ever. ‘What the hell are you doing, trooper?’ he managed to bark,
his pronounced Adam’s apple bobbing furiously.
‘Performing the ministry of the sacred Inquisition,’ I told him and shot
him through the head.
The saruthi had been thrown into a state of great agitation. I have no way
of knowing what emotions they were experiencing, if they experienced any
at all. But they reacted as if horrified by the turn of events, distressed and
appalled. Hell-gun fire from troopers who were convinced that the aliens
were the aggressors blasted into two of them. One burst open and collapsed
onto the tiles in a spreading pool of grey ichor and gristle. The other lost a
limb and began to drag itself towards the arches with its remaining stilts.
Over the tumult of gunfire and human voices, the saruthi began to wail.
Whether it was a threat, a warning, a call of distress, or an order to retreat I
could not tell. They scuttled maniacally, their alien shriek shaking the air.
Two clattered forward suddenly, towards the bewildered trooper escort.
Electric-blue discharges fizzled around the saruthi’s swaying heads and then
spat raking beams of ice-bright energy at their attackers. Two troopers were
vaporised, their constituent matter boiling away in searing flashes of light.
I caught sight of Mandragore. The brute had already killed one trooper in
an attempt to curtail the mindless wildfire, but now the saruthi had fired on
them, the troopers clearly felt justified in their action and redoubled their
efforts. An alien beam sliced into Mandragore’s arm, and rage consumed
him. He attacked the saruthi himself, wielding a massive chain-axe.
I hoped they’d kill him.
I pushed through a jumble of bodies and came out on the other side of the
parked vehicles. Ahead I saw Dazzo, still kneeling by the ghastly white
slave-beasts as if in a trance. The unholy prize was clenched in his hands.
I ran at him.
Fischig, his helmet missing, appeared alongside me. His borrowed black
armour was awash with blood.
‘Twane!’ he bawled over his shoulder, and the disguised Gudrunite
appeared, running after us, firing from the hip. Grenades were now
exploding amid the mindless fighting. Bodies and chips of octagonal tiling
were hurled into the air. One of the troop carriers was on fire.
The three of us were closest by far to the accursed ‘true matter’. A
saruthi came ploughing forward, spurring the jostling, frenzied slave-things
aside with its stilt-spikes as it made for Dazzo.
With a juddering blow from one stilt, it knocked the kneeling man over
and sent the Necroteuch scattering from his hands.
Malahite, on his hands and knees by the slave-things, let out a cry and
dived after it. The saruthi jittered around to stop him just as Fischig and
Twane blew it apart with hell-gun shots. Stringy grey fluid splashed across
the tessellated tiles.
Another saruthi, its skull crackling with electrical power, blasted its kin’s
murderers. Twane convulsed and exploded in a drizzle of matter. By his
side, Fischig was thrown over by the blinding detonation, his armour ripped
open.
There was no time to help him. Clutching the book, Malahite was
running away across the plateau, away from the straggled, brutal warfare. I
severed his left leg at the knee with a round from my hell-gun and he
dropped onto his face. When I reached him, he was clawing forward,
daubed in blood, reaching for the fallen book.
‘Leave it!’ I snapped, pulling off my helmet and pointing the hell-gun
down at him one handed. He saw my face and cursed. I knelt and picked up
the little volume. Even through my armoured gloves, I could feel its heat.
For a second, a long hypnotised second, it was all I knew. I understood why
Dazzo had remained kneeling there for so long after he first grasped it. The
content of the book, that ancient lore, was alive somehow, fidgeting,
rustling, calling to me.
Calling me by name.
It knew me. It beckoned to me, telling me to open it and experience its
wonders. I didn’t even think to resist. What it was showing me was so
wondrous, so sublime, so beautiful... the stars themselves, and behind the
stars, the mechanisms of reality, the intricate and oh-so perfect workings of
a transcendent natural force we misguidedly and dismissively called Chaos.
I undid the wire-like claps that kept the book shut...
Abruptly, a rough, foul psychic force burst into my mind, breaking the
spell. I began to turn, to look away from the opening book. That half-turn
was just enough to stop me dying.
I was felled by a monumental blow to the shoulder. As I dropped, the
book spun helplessly from my yearning hand. The tiles underneath me were
awash with blood.
My blood.
I rolled over as the next blow came. The screaming teeth of the chain axe
missed me by a hair’s breadth and shattered the bloody tiles.
Mandragore, bastard child of the Emperor.
I scrambled backwards in blind panic. The stinking Chaos warrior was
right on me, his lurid armour flecked with human blood and alien ichor. My
dazed half-turn at the last moment had spoiled his first blow, but still the
back plate of my naval trooper combat armour was shredded; the left
shoulder guard was completely ripped away. The glancing shoulder wound
was savage and deep. Blood gouted through torn flesh and armour,
cascading down my left arm. Writhing backwards, I found my hands
slipping on the blood-washed octagons.
I lashed out with my mind. It was no match for his fearsome psychic
capacity, but it was enough to put him off his swing. The shrieking chain-
blade of the axe sawed through the air over my ducking head.
My fallen hell-gun was out of reach, and I doubted it would have made a
dent in the monster anyway. His baying face, its sutured-on skin stretching
around the gaping jaws of his skull, was all I could see.
My left arm was numb and useless. I threw myself to my feet, pulling my
sword from my webbing.
The device is a fine weapon, of the old kind. It has no material blade like
other, cruder models I have seen. It is a hilt, twenty centimetres long, inlaid
and wound with silver thread, enclosing a fusion cell that generates a metre-
long blade of coherent light. The Provost of Inx himself blessed it for me,
charging it to ‘protect our brother Eisenhorn always from the spawn of
damnation’.
I prayed now that he hadn’t been wasting his breath.
I ignited the blade and fended away the next axe swing. Sparks and metal
shrapnel flew from the clash, and the beast’s huge strength nearly struck it
from my hand. I jumped back a pace or two from the next whistling bow.
My head was swimming. Was it the loss of blood or the after-effects of that
seductive book?
Mandragore was incandescent with fury now. I was proving to be
annoyingly difficult to slay – for a mere mortal.
I had a dread feeling it wouldn’t last.
He rushed me again, towering over me, and I managed to deflect the
force of the chain-axe. But immediately he brought the butt of the weapon’s
long haft around and struck me in the chest, sending me flying. I actually
left the ground and cleared several metres.
I landed hard on my injured shoulder. The pain rendered me insensible
for a second. That was all he needed.
He crossed the blood-flecked tiles to me in two strides, the axe rising in
the air as his growl rose in pitch. With a flailing motion, I kicked the
Necroteuch towards him. It struck the toe of one great boot.
‘Don’t forget what you came for, abomination!’ I rasped out.
Mandragore Carrion – son of Fulgrim, worthy of Slaanesh, champion of
the Emperor’s Children, killer of the living, defiler of the dead, keeper of
secrets – paused. With a hacking laugh, his soulless eyes never leaving me,
he stooped for the book.
‘You counsel well, inquisitor, for... a...’
His fingers were around the Necroteuch, the metal-shod digits dwarfing
it. His voice trailed away. Triumph faded from his hideous face; rage
drained away; blood-lust dimmed. His mask of skin hung slack from its
sutures. The light in his blood-rimmed eyes dulled.
The Necroteuch sang through every fibre and shred of corrupted being,
stealing from him all sense of the outside world.
I stood, unsteadily, flexed my grip on the power sword, and sheared his
head from his shoulders.
Before it had even struck the ground, the spinning skull combusted and
blazed white hot, dripping liquid flame onto the tiles. The fireball bounced
and rolled, rocked over, and consumed itself in a ferocious, dirty fire that
swiftly left nothing behind but blackened shards of skull in a smouldering
scorch mark.
The body remained standing, burning from within the torso, shooting
long tongues of sickly green flame up out of the neck cavity. A column of
filthy black smoke rose into the still air. The gaudy robes and cloak quickly
caught, and thick flames enfolded the headless, metal ruin.
At the last moment, I struck off Mandragore’s fist with the sword’s bright
blade, and the Necroteuch it clutched fell clear of the flames. I felt as
though it was pleading with me to take it up again, to immerse myself again
in the wonders it contained.
Such wonders. I bent down, torn by duty. The thing should be destroyed,
but it held such secrets! Could not the Inquisition, and the Imperium as a
whole, benefit from the infinite truths it contained? Had I even the right to
destroy something so priceless?
The puritan part of me had no doubt. But another part abhorred the idea
of wasting it. Knowledge is knowledge, surely? Evil stems from how
knowledge is used. And such knowledge was here...
Perhaps if I read a page or two, I could make a better decision.
I shook my head to cast away the insidious thoughts. The noise of the
battle came rushing back. I looked back across the plateau, beyond
Mandragore’s upright, burning corpse and the sprawled body of Malahite.
The last few pockets of fighting were playing out, and the great tiled
platform was littered with dead and debris. Both carrier vehicles were
ablaze. The saruthi had gone, taking even their corpses with them. It
seemed to me the Gudrunites had overwhelmed the troopers by sheer
numbers. Few figures were still standing, and I could see none of my
companions.
His regal cloak torn and his face bloodied, Oberon Glaw strode towards
me, a laspistol clenched in his right hand.
‘Throw that down, Glaw. It’s over.’
‘For you, yes.’ He raised the weapon. A munitions canister on one of the
burning carriers ignited and blew the armoured vehicle apart in a stunning
conflagration. Flung out by the blast, broken armour plating and sections of
track whizzed through the air like missiles. A chunk of trans-axle impaled
Lord Glaw through the back of the head. He fell without a sound.
I grabbed a piece of smoking hull plate, and scooped the Necroteuch up
on it. I would heed no more of its soft enticements. I let it slide off the
makeshift scoop into Mandragore’s upright corpse, so that it fell down
through the open neck of the blazing armour into the furnace of the torso.
The flames turned red, then darker still. The blaze grew more intense.
Something without a mouth screamed.
I LIMPED AWAY from the pyre. Malahite was alive and awake, calling out,
‘Locke, please! Please!’ in a hoarse voice.
Across the plateau, one of the naval speeders lifted into the air. Gorgone
Locke was at the controls, with Dazzo slumped in the seat beside him. In
moments, the racing speeder was disappearing over the ragged peaks, away
from the plateau, towards the endless beach.
MIDAS, BEQUIN, AEMOS and Lowink had survived the ordeal and the
battle, though all had minor injuries. Two dozen Gudrunites were also still
alive, including Jeruss.
Aemos wanted to see to my wound, but I had bound it tight to stanch the
flow of blood and I wanted to waste no more time.
‘I think it would be prudent to get out of here,’ I told them.
Fischig lay on a makeshift stretcher. The saruthi weapon that had
obliterated Twane had cost him an arm and half of his face. Mercifully, he
was unconscious. Two Gudrunites bore him up.
‘It pains me to say this, but we’re taking him too,’ I told Midas and
Jeruss, indicating the collapsed Malahite.
‘Are you sure?’ Betancore asked.
‘The Inquisition will want to plunder his brain.’
OUR RAGGED, BATTERED party left the dark uplands and retraced our steps
to the hazy levels of the beach. The booming had increased in volume and
frequency and the sky was growing dark.
‘It is as if,’ said Aemos ominously, ‘this place is coming to an end.’
‘We don’t want to be here when that happens,’ I said.
From the beach, we could see the two Imperial frigates and the
merchantman had departed. A wind, thick with an afterburn of ammonia,
was picking up. Their vacuum suits more or less intact, Midas and Lowink
went ahead to recover the gun-cutter.
My vox link crackled. Maxilla’s voice suddenly sang out.
‘Eisenhorn? For pity’s sake, are you there? Are you there? Three ships
just left, moving right past me! Conditions are worsening. I cannot stay here
much longer. Respond! Please respond!’
‘Maxilla! This is Eisenhorn! Can you hear me? We need you to move in
and pick us up. We have injuries... Fischig and several others. This whole
environment may be collapsing. Repeat, I need you to move the Essene in
to my location and pick us up!’
A moment or two of static. Then his answer.
‘As you instruct, Gregor, but it’s not going to be easy. Say again, what
did you say about Fischig?’
‘He’s hurt, Maxilla! Come and get us!’
‘Hurry!’ Bequin shouted over my shoulder. ‘We don’t want to be here
any more!’
More static. ‘Tell Alizabeth, I agree with that! Ha!’
The echoes, delays and dislocations were catching up with themselves.
The wrongness was righting itself and, I thought with irony, that made
things no better for us.
TWENTY-ONE
A gathering of peers.
Lord Rorken contemplates.
Malahite’s secrets.
TWO DAYS LATER, aboard the Essene at anchor beyond the treacherous
reaches of system KCX-1288, we made our rendezvous with the Imperial
taskforce outbound from Gudrun.
We’d made good our escape from the world of the plateau in less than
two hours. As Aemos had predicted, the place seemed to unravel around us,
as if that apparently timeless realm of the sea, the beach and the uplands
had been nothing but an ingenious construct, a space engineered by the
saruthi to accommodate the meeting with their human ‘guests’. As we rode
the gun-cutter back to the waiting Essene, the hazy radiance had begun to
dim and atmospheric pressure dropped. We were beset by turbulence, and
natural gravity began to reassert its influence. The impossible cavity had
begun to decompose. By the time Maxilla was running the Essene down the
dark corridor of arches as fast as he dared, the inner space where we had
confronted the aliens was nothing but a dark maelstrom of ammonia and
arsenical vapours. Our chronometers and horologiums had begun to run
properly again.
We left the fractured planet behind, braving flares and gravity storms as
we made a dash for the outer system. Forty minutes after leaving that place,
rear-aligned sensors could find no trace of the ‘wound’, as if it had
collapsed, or had never been there to begin with.
How the saruthi came and went I had no idea, and Aemos was little help.
We had seen no sign of other vessels or other points of egress from the
planet’s crust.
‘Do they live within the planet?’ I asked Aemos as we stood at an
observation platform, looking back at the retreating star through glare-
dimmed ports.
‘I fancy not. Their technologies are beyond my ken, but I feel that they
might have arrived on the plateau through those archways from another
world, into a place they had built for the meeting.’
Such a concept defied my imaginings. Aemos was suggesting interstellar
teleportation.
Outside the system, there had been little trace of the heretical fleet. As far
as Maxilla was able to tell from drive and warp wakes, the three ships, no
doubt bearing Locke and Dazzo, had rejoined their attentive flotilla and
moved away almost at once into the immaterium.
Other warp indicators informed us that the taskforce was approaching, no
more than two days away. We dropped grav-anchor, saw to our wounds, and
waited.
THIRTY WEEKS BEFORE, as we departed Damask, I had sent my request for
assistance to Gudrun via Lowink astropathically. I had outlined as much of
the situation as possible, providing what detail and conjecture I could, and
had hoped the Lord Militant would send a military expedition to support
me. I did not demand, as the likes of Commodus Voke were wont to do. I
was sure the urgency and importance of my communiqué would speak for
itself.
ELEVEN SHIPS LOOMED out of the empyrean before us in battle formation:
six Imperial frigates running out in the van, fighter wings riding out ahead
of them in formation. Behind this spearhead of warships came the
battleships Vulpecula and Saint Scythus, each three times the size of the
frigates, each a bristling ogre of a vessel. To the rear was an ominous trio of
cruisers, black ships of the Imperial Inquisition. This was no military
expedition. This was an inquisitorial taskforce.
We exchanged hails, identified ourselves and were escorted into the fleet
pack by an honour guard of thunderhawks. Shuttles transferred our
wounded, including the still unconscious Fischig and the prisoner Malahite,
to medicae faculties aboard the Saint Scythus. An hour later, at the request
of Admiral Spatian, I also crossed by shuttle to the battleship. They were
awaiting my report.
MY LEFT ARM bound and tightly slung in a surgical brace, I wore a suit of
black and my button-sleeved leather coat, my rosette pinned at my throat.
Aemos, in sober green robes, accompanied me.
In the echoing vault of the Saint Scythus’s docking bay, Procurator Olm
Madorthene and a detail of navy stormtroopers waited to greet us.
Madorthene wore the impressive white dress uniform in which I had first
seen him, and the men’s blue armour was rich with gold braid and
ceremonial decoration.
Madorthene greeted me with a salute and we strode as a group towards
the elevators that would carry us up into the command levels of the ship.
‘How goes the uprising?’ I asked.
‘Well enough, inquisitor. We understand the Lord Militant has declared
the Helican Schism over and quashed, though pacification wars are still
raging across Thracian.’
‘Losses?’
‘Considerable. Mainly to the population and materials of the world
affected, though some fleet and guard units have taken a beating. Lord
Glaw’s treason has cost the Imperium dear.’
‘Lord Glaw’s treason has cost him his life. His body rots on a nameless
world in the system behind us.’
He nodded. ‘Your master will be pleased.’
‘My master?’
LORD INQUISITOR PHLEBAS Alessandro Rorken sat in a marble throne at
the far end of a chapel-like audience hall two decks beneath the main bridge
of the Saint Scythus. I had met him twice before, and felt no more confident
now for those experiences. He wore simple robes of crimson over black
clothing and gloves, and no other decoration except for a gold signet ring of
office on one knuckle. The austere simplicity of his garb seemed to
accentuate his authority. His noble skull was shaved except for a forked
goatee. His eyes, deep set and wise, glittered with intelligence.
Around him was his entourage. Ten inquisitorial novices of interrogator
rank or below, upheld banners, sacred flamer weapons, caskets of scrolls
and slates, gleaming tools of torture on red satin cushions, or open hymnals.
Flanking them were four bodyguards in red cloaks with double-handed
broadswords held stiffly upright before their faces. Their armour was
ornate, and the full visors had been fashioned and painted into the
likenesses of four apostolic saints: Olios, Ferido, Manezzer and Kadmon.
The masks were flat-eyed and expressionless and almost naive, lifted
exactly from representations on illuminated manuscripts of old. A huddle of
dark-robed savants waited nearby, and a dozen cherub servitors in the form
of podgy three-year-olds with golden locks and the spiteful faces of
gargoyles circled around, scolding and mocking, on grav-assisted golden
wings.
‘Approach, Eisenhorn,’ Lord Rorken said, his soft voice carrying down
the chamber effortlessly. ‘Approach all.’
At his words, other figures emerged from anterooms along the sides of
the hall, and took their seats to either hand. One was Admiral Spatian, an
ancient, skeletal giant in white dress uniform, attended by several of his
senior staff. The others were inquisitors. Titus Endor, in his maroon coat,
unescorted save for a hunched female savant. He cast me an encouraging
nod as I passed by. Commodus Voke, wizened and shuffling, helped onto
his seat by a tall man in black. The man’s head was bald and hairless apart
from a few sickly clumps. His scalp, neck and face were livid with scar-
tissue from injuries and surgery. It was Heldane. His encounter with the
carnodon had not improved his looks. Like Endor, Voke nodded to me, but
there was no friendship in it.
Next to him, Inquisitor Schongard, stocky and squat, the black metal
mask obscuring everything but his raddled eyes. He took his seat and was
flanked by two lean, supple females, members of some death-cult by the
look of them, both nearly naked save for extensive body art, barbed hoods
and harnesses strung with blades.
Opposite Schongard sat Konrad Molitor, an ultra-radical member of the
ordos I had little love or respect for. Molitor was a fit, athletic man dressed
from head to toe in a tight weave-armour bodyglove of yellow and black
check with a polished silver cuirass strapped around his torso. His black
hair was close-trimmed and tonsured and he affected the air of a warrior
monk from the First Crusade. Behind him stood three robed and hooded
acolytes, one carrying Molitor’s ornate powersword, another a silver chalice
and paten, and the third a reliquary box and a smoking censer. Molitor’s
pupils were bright yellow and his gaze never wavered from me.
Last to take his seat, at Lord Rorken’s right hand, was a giant in black
power armour, a Space Marine of the Deathwatch chapter, the dedicated
unit of the Ordo Xenos. The Deathwatch was one of the Chambers Militant,
Marine chapters founded exclusively for the Inquisition, obscure and secret
even by the standards of the blessed Adeptus Astartes. At my approach, the
warrior removed his helmet and set it on his armoured knee, revealing a
slab-jawed, pale face and cropped grey hair. His thin mouth was curled in a
frown.
Servitors brought a seat for me, and I took my place facing the Lord
Inquisitor. Aemos stood at my side, silent for once.
‘We have read your preliminary report, Brother Eisenhorn. Quite a tale it
is. Of great moment.’ Lord Rorken savoured the last word. ‘You pursued
Glaw’s heretic fleet to this Emperor-forsaken outer world, certain that they
planned to trade with a xenos breed. That trade, you stated, was for an item
whose very nature would threaten the safety and sanctity of our society.’
‘I reported correctly, lord brother.’
‘We have known you always to be earnest and truthful, brother. We did
not doubt your words. After all, are we not here in... unusual force?’
He gestured around and there was some laughter, most of it forced, most
of it from Voke and Molitor.
‘And what was this item?’
‘The aliens possessed a single copy of a profane and forbidden work we
know as the Necroteuch.’
The reaction was immediate. Voices rose all around, in surprise, alarm or
disbelief. I heard Voke, Molitor and Schongard all calling out questions and
scorn. The assembled retainers, novices and acolytes around us whispered
or gabbled furiously. The cherubs wailed and fluttered into hiding behind
Lord Rorken’s throne. Rorken himself studied me dubiously. I saw that
even the grim Space Marine looked questioningly at the inquisitor.
Lord Rorken raised his hand and the hubbub died away.
‘Is that confirmed, Brother Eisenhorn?’
‘Lord, it is. I saw it with my own eyes and felt its evil. It was the
Necroteuch. As far as I have learned, the xenos breed – known as the
saruthi – came upon a lost copy thousands of years ago, and through
recently established lines of communication with the Glaw cabal, agreed to
exchange it for certain artefacts of their own culture.’
‘Preposterous!’ spat Commodus Voke. ‘The Necroteuch is a myth, and a
wretched one at that! These twisted alien filth have fabricated this as a lure
for the gullible heretics!’
I looked over at Voke and repeated, ‘I saw it with my own eyes and felt
its evil. It was the Necroteuch.’
Admiral Spatian looked up at Lord Rorken. ‘This thing, this book – is it
so valuable that these heretics would throw the entire sub-sector into schism
to cover their attempts to retrieve it?’
‘It is priceless!’ cut in Molitor from across the chamber. ‘Beyond worth!
If the legends of it are even fractionally true, it contains lore surpassing our
understanding! They would not think twice of burning worlds to get it, or of
sacrificing their entire resources to acquire the power it would bring them.’
‘It has always been plain,’ Endor said softly, ‘that the stakes in this
matter have been astonishingly high. Though I am shocked by Brother
Gregor’s news, I am not surprised. Only an icon as potent as the Necroteuch
could have set this bloodshed in motion.’
‘But the Necroteuch! Such a thing!’ Schongard hissed.
‘Were they successful, Inquisitor Eisenhorn?’ the Space Marine asked
suddenly, staring directly at me.
‘No, brother-captain, they were not. The effort was desperate and close
run, but my force was able to spoil their contact with the xenos saruthi. The
aliens were driven off, and most of the heretics’ advance guard, including
Lord Glaw and a blasphemous child of the Emperor allied to his cause,
were slain.’
‘I read of this Mandragore in your report,’ said the Marine. ‘His presence
was fundamental in the decision for my unit to accompany this force.’
‘The Emperor’s Children, Terra damn their souls, clearly wanted the
book for themselves. They had sent Mandragore to assist Glaw in its
recovery. That beings such as they took it seriously confirms the truth of my
story, I believe.’
The noble Marine nodded. ‘And Mandragore is dead, you say?’
‘I killed him myself.’
The Deathwatch warrior sat back slightly, his brows rising gently in
surprise.
‘Some heretics escaped your purge?’ Schongard asked.
‘Two key conspirators, brother. The trader, Gorgone Locke, who I believe
was instrumental in forging the original contact between the saruthi and
Glaw’s cabal. And an ecclesiarch named Dazzo, who I would see as the
spiritual force behind their enterprise. They fled from the fight, rejoined the
waiting elements of their fleet, and left this system.’
‘Destination?’ asked Spatian.
‘It is still being plotted, admiral.’
‘And how many ships? That bastard traitor Estrum ran with fifteen.’
‘He lost at least two frigates in that star system. A non-standard merchant
ship that I believe belongs to Locke is with them.’
‘Have they taken to their heels and run defeated, or have they some
further agenda?’ Lord Rorken asked.
‘I have further research to make before I can answer that, lord.’
Spatian stood and looked towards the Lord Inquisitor. ‘Even if they’re
running, we can’t permit them to escape. They must be hounded down and
annihilated. Permission to retask the battle-pack and prepare to pursue.’
‘Permission granted, admiral.’
Then Molitor spoke up. ‘No one has asked the most important question
of our heroic Brother Eisenhorn,’ he said, stressing the word ‘heroic’ in a
way that did not flatter. ‘What happened to the Necroteuch?’
I turned to face him. ‘I did what any of us would have done, Brother
Molitor. I burned it.’
UPROAR FOLLOWED. MOLITOR was on his feet, accusing me of nothing
short of heresy at the top of his reedy voice. Schongard raised his own
serpentine tones in support of the accusations, while Endor and Voke
shouted them down. The retinues howled and bickered across the floor.
Both the Deathwatch captain and I remained seated and silent.
Lord Rorken rose. ‘Enough!’ He turned to the glowering Molitor. ‘State
your objection, Brother Molitor, quickly and simply.’
Molitor nodded, and licked his lips, his yellow eyes darting around the
room. ‘Eisenhorn must suffer our sternest censure for this act of vandalism!
The Necroteuch may be a foul and proscribed work, but we are the
Inquisition, lord. By what right did he simply destroy it? Such a thing
should have been sequestered and brought before our most learned savants
for study! To obliterate it out of hand robs us of knowledge, of wisdom, of
secrets unimaginable! The contents of the Necroteuch might have given us
insight into the archenemy of mankind, incalculable insight! How might it
have strengthened us and armed us for the ceaseless fight? Eisenhorn has
disgraced the very heart of our sacred Inquisition!’
‘Brother Schongard?’
‘My lord, I agree. It was a desperate and rash action by Eisenhorn.
Carefully handled, the Necroteuch would have provided us with all measure
of advantageous knowledge. Its arcane secrets would have been weapons
against the foe. I may applaud his rigorous efforts in thwarting Glaw and his
conspirators, but this erasure of occult lore earns only my opprobrium.’
‘Brother Voke? What s—’ Lord Rorken began, but I cut him off.
‘Is this a court, my lord? Am I on trial?’
‘No, brother, you are not. But the magnitude of your actions must be
analysed and considered. Brother Voke?’
Voke rose. ‘Eisenhorn was right. The Necroteuch was an abomination. It
would have been heresy to permit its continued existence!’
‘Brother Endor?’
Titus did not rise. He turned in his seat and looked down the hall at
Konrad Molitor. ‘Gregor Eisenhorn has my full support. From your
moaning, Molitor, I wonder what kind of man I am listening to. A radical,
certainly. An inquisitor? I have my doubts.’
Molitor leapt up again, raging. ‘You knave! You whoreson bastard knave!
How dare you?’
‘Very easily,’ replied Endor, leaning back and folding his arms. ‘And
you, Schongard, you are no better. Shame on you! What secrets did you
both think we could learn, except perhaps how to pollute our minds and boil
away our sanity? The Necroteuch has been forbidden since before our
foundation. We need not know what’s in it to accept that prohibition! All we
need is the precious knowledge that it should be destroyed, unread, on sight.
Tell me, do you need to actually contract Uhlren’s Pox yourself to know
that it is fatal?’
Lord Rorken smiled at this. He glanced at the Space Marine. ‘Brother-
Captain Cynewolf?’
The captain made a modest shrug. ‘I command kill-teams charged with
the extermination of aliens, mutants and heretics, lord. The ethics of
scholarship and book-learning I leave to the savants. For whatever it’s
worth, though, I would have burned it without a second thought.’
There was a long silence. Sometimes I was almost glad no one could tell
when I was smiling.
Lord Rorken sat back. ‘The objections of my brothers are noted. I myself
commend Eisenhorn. Given the extremity of his situation, he made the best
decision.’
‘Thank you, my lord.’
‘Let us retire now and consider this matter. I want to hear proposals for
our next course of action in four hours.’
‘WHAT NOW?’ TITUS Endor asked as we sat in his private suite aboard the
Saint Scythus. A female servitor brought us glasses of vintage amasec,
matured in nalwood casks.
‘The remnants must be purged,’ I said. ‘Dazzo and the rest of the heretic
fleet. They may have been cheated of their prize, and they may be running
now. Perhaps they’ll run for years. But they have the resources of a
battlegroup at their disposal, and the will to use it. I will recommend we
hunt them down and finish this sorry matter once and for all.’
Aemos entered the chamber, made a respectful nod to Endor, and handed
me a data-slate.
‘The admiral’s astronavigators have finished plotting the course of the
heretic fleet. It matches the estimations Maxilla has just sent me.’
I scanned the data. ‘Do you have a chart, Titus?’
He nodded and engaged the functions of a glass-topped cogitator unit.
The surface glowed, and he entered the reference codes from the slate.
‘So... they’re not running back into Imperial space. No surprise. Nor out
to the lawless distances of the Halo Stars.’
‘Their course takes them here: 56-Izar. Ten weeks away.’
‘In saruthi territory.’
‘Right in the heart of saruthi territory.’
LORD INQUISITOR RORKEN nodded gravely. ‘As you say, brother, this
business may be less finished than we thought.’
‘They cannot hope to count the saruthi as allies, or believe they would
give them safe haven. The entente between Glaw’s forces and the xenos
breed was fragile and tenuous to say the least, and what peace existed
between them was ruined by the violence. Dazzo must have some other
reason to head there.’
Lord Rorken paced the floor of his state chamber, brooding, toying with
the signet ring of office on his gloved finger. His flock of cherubs roosted
uneasily along the backs of armchairs and couches around the room.
Twitching their gargoyle heads from one side to another, they watched me
keenly as I stood waiting for a reply. ‘My imagination runs wild,
Eisenhorn,’ he said at last.
‘I intend to question the archeoxenologist, Malahite, directly. I am sure
he can furnish us with additional intelligence. Just as I am sure he lacks the
capacity to resist displayed by his aristo master Urisel.’
Rorken stopped pacing and clapped his gloved hands together with a
decisive smack. Startled, the cherubs flew up into the air and began
mobbing around the high ceiling. ‘Course will be laid for 56-Izar at once,’
said Lord Rorken, ignoring their lisping squawk. ‘Bring me your findings
without delay.’
NAVAL SECURITY HAD imprisoned Girolamo Malahite in the secure wing
of the battleship’s medicae facility. The injury I had given him had been
treated, but no effort had been made to equip him with a prosthetic limb. I
was looking forward to opening his secrets.
I passed through the coldly lit infirmary, and checked on Fischig. He was
still unconscious, though a physician told me his condition was stable. The
chastener lay on a plastic-tented cot, wired into wheezing life-supporting
pumps and gurgling circulators, his damaged form masked by dressings,
anointing charms and metal bone-clamps.
From the infirmary, I passed down an unheated main companionway,
showed my identification to the duty guards, and entered the forbidding
secure wing. I was at a second checkpoint, at the entrance to the gloomy
cell block itself, when I heard screaming ringing from a cell beyond.
I pushed past the guards and, with them at my heels, reached the greasy
iron shutters of the cell.
‘Open it!’ I barked, and one of the guards fumbled with his ring of
electronic keys. ‘Quickly, man!’
The cell shutter whirred open and locked into its open setting. Konrad
Molitor and his three hooded acolytes turned to face me, outraged at the
interruption. Their surgically gloved hands were wet with pink froth.
Behind them, Girolamo Malahite lay whimpering on a horizontal metal
cage strung on chains from the ceiling. He was naked, and almost every
centimetre of skin had been peeled from his flesh.
‘FETCH SURGEONS AND physicians. And summon Lord Rorken. Now!’ I
told the cell guards. ‘Would you care to explain what you are doing here?’ I
said to Molitor.
He would, I think, have preferred not to answer me, and his trio of
retainers looked set to grapple with me and hurl me from the cell.
But the muzzle of my autopistol was pressed flat against Konrad
Molitor’s perspiring brow and none of them dared move.
‘I am conducting an interview with the prisoner...’ he began.
‘Malahite is my prisoner.’
‘He is in the custody of the Inquisition, Brother Eisenhorn...’
‘He is my prisoner, Molitor! Inquisitorial protocol permits me the right to
question him first!’
Molitor tried to back away, but I kept the pressure of the gun firm against
his cranium. There was no mistaking the fury in his eyes at this treatment,
but he contained it, realising provocation was the last thing I needed.
‘I, I was concerned for your health, brother,’ he began, trying to mollify,
‘the injuries you have suffered, your fatigue. Malahite had to be
interrogated with all speed, and thought I would ease your burden by
commencing the—’
‘Commencing? You’ve all but killed him! I don’t believe your excuse for
a moment, Molitor. If you’d truly intended to help me, you would have
asked permission. You wanted his secrets for yourself.’
‘A damn lie!’ he spat.
I cocked the pistol with my thumb. In the confines of the iron cell, the
click was loud and threatening. ‘Indeed? Then share what you have learned
so far.’
He hesitated. ‘He proved resilient. We have learned little from him.’
Boots clattered down the cell bay outside and the guards returned with
two green robed fleet surgeons and a quartet of medicae orderlies.
‘Throne of Terra!’ one of the surgeons cried, seeing the ruined man on
the rack.
‘Do what you can, doctor. Stabilise him.’
The physicians hurried to work, calling for tools, apparatus and cold
dressings. Malahite whimpered again.
‘Threatening an Imperial inquisitor with deadly force is a capital crime,’
said one of the hooded acolytes, edging forward.
‘Lord Rorken will be displeased,’ said another.
‘Put away your weapon and our master will co-operate,’ the third added.
‘Tell your sycophants to be silent,’ I told Molitor.
‘Please, Inquisitor Eisenhorn.’ The third acolyte spoke again, his soft
voice issuing from the shadows of his cowl. ‘This is an unfortunate mistake.
We will make reparations. Put away your weapon.’
The voice was strangely confident, and in speaking for Molitor, displayed
surprising authority. But no more than Aemos or Midas would have done
for me should the situation have been reversed.
‘Take your assistants and get out, Molitor. We will continue this once I
have spoken with Lord Rorken.’
The four of them left swiftly, and I holstered my weapon.
The chief physician came over to me, shaking his head. ‘This man is
dead, sir.’
AT LORD RORKEN’S request, the warship’s senior ecclesiarch provided a
great chapel amidships for our use. I think the shipboard curia was
impressed by the Lord Inquisitor’s fury.
We had little time to repair the damage done by the incident, even though
the medicae had placed Malahite’s lamentable corpse in a stasis field.
Lord Rorken wanted to conduct the matter himself, but realised he was
duty bound to offer me the opportunity first. To have denied me would have
compounded Molitor’s insult, even if Rorken was Lord Inquisitor.
I told Rorken I welcomed the task, adding that my working knowledge of
the entire case made me the best candidate.
WE ASSEMBLED IN the chapel. It was a long hall of fluted columns and
mosaic flooring. Stained glass windows depicting the triumphs of the
Emperor were backlit by the empyrean vortex outside the ship. The
chamber rumbled with the through-deck vibration of the Saint Scythus’s
churning drive.
The facing ranks of pews and the raised stalls to either side were filling
with Inquisitorial staff and ecclesiarchs. All my ‘brothers’ were in
attendance, even Molitor, who I knew would not be able to stay away.
I walked with Lowink down the length of the nave to the raised plinth
where Malahite lay in stasis. Astropaths, nearly thirty of them, drawn from
the ship’s complement and the inquisitorial delegation, had assembled
behind it. Hooded, misshapen, some borne along on wheeled mechanical
frames or carried on litters by dour servitors, they hissed and murmured
among themselves. Lowink went to brief them. He seemed to relish this
moment of superiority over astropaths who normally outranked him.
Lowink had not the power to manage this rite alone; his resources were
enough for only the simplest psychometric audits. But his knowledge of my
abilities and practises made him vital in orchestrating their efforts.
I looked at Malahite, flayed and pathetic in the shimmering envelope of
stasis. Grotesquely, he reminded me of the God-Emperor himself, resting
for eternity in the great stasis field of the golden throne, preserved until the
end of time from the death Horus had tried to bestow upon him.
Lowink nodded to me. The astropathic choir was ready.
I looked around and found Endor’s face in the congregation. He had
placed himself near Molitor and had promised to watch the bastard closely
for me. Schongard sat near the back, disassociating himself from his fellow
radical’s transgression.
I saw Brother-Captain Cynewolf and two of his awe-inspiring fellow
Space Marines take their place behind the altar screen. All of them were in
full armour and carried storm bolters. They weren’t here for the show. They
were here as a safeguard.
‘Proceed, brother,’ Lord Rorken said from his raised seat.
The choir began to nurse the folds of the warp apart with their swelling
adoration. Psychic cold swept through the vault, and some in the
congregation moaned, either in fear or with involuntary empathic vibration.
Commodus Voke, helped from his seat by the baleful Heldane, shuffled
forward to join me. As a concession to Lord Rorken for allowing me this
honour, I had agreed that the veteran inquisitor could partake of the auto-
séance at my side. The risk was great, after all. Two minds were better than
one, and in truth, it would be good to have the old reptile’s mental power at
close hand.
‘Lower the stasis field,’ I said. The moaning of the astropaths grew
louder. As the translucent field died away, Voke and I reached out ungloved
hands and touched the oozing, skinless face.
THE VEIL OF the warp drew back. I looked as if down a pillar of smoke,
ghost white, which rushed up around me. In my ears, the harrowing screams
of infinity and the billion billion souls castaway therein.
BLUE LIGHT, STREAKED with storm-fires. A sound that mingled seismic
rambling and the ethereal plainsong of long decayed temples. A smell of
woodsmoke, incense, saltwater, blood...
A COSMIC EMPTINESS so massive and ever-lasting, my mind numbed as I
raced across it. It was gone in a blink, just fast enough to prevent the sheer
scale taking my sanity with it.
ANOTHER BLINK. FLARES of red. Colliding galaxies, catching fire. Souls
like comets furrowing the immaterium. Voices of god-monsters calling from
behind the flimsy backdrop of space.
BLINK. OCEANIC BLACKNESS. Another snatch of plainsong.
BLINK. STELLAR NURSERIES, fulsome with embryonic suns.
BLINK. COLD LIGHT, eons old.
BLINK.
‘GREGOR?’
I looked around and saw Commodus Voke. I had not recognised his voice
at first. It seemed to have been softened, as if the event had humbled him.
We stood on a slope of green shale, under a pair of suns that radiated
enormous heat. Desiccated mountains lined the horizon, looming like
fortresses.
We moved across the clinking shale towards the sound of the excavator.
An ancient monotask, its pistons slimy with oil, dug into the side of a rock
face with shovel-bladed limbs. It gouted steam and smoke from its boiler
stack and excreted rock waste down a rear conveyor belt into heaps of
glittering spoil.
We moved past it, and past other excavations in the rock face where
smaller servitors brushed and polished fragments from the exposed strata
and laid them carefully on find-trays.
Malahite stood watching them work. He was younger here, youthful
almost, tanned and fit by the suns and the work. He wore shorts and loose
fatigues, his skin streaked with dust.
‘I thought you’d come,’ he said.
‘Will you co-operate?’ I asked him.
‘I’ve little time to talk,’ he said, bending down to examine items that a
servitor had just placed on a tray. ‘There’s work to do. A great deal to
uncover before the rains come in a week or so.’
He knew who we were, but still he could not quite divorce himself from
the reality around him.
‘There’s plenty of time to talk.’
Malahite straightened up. ‘I suppose you’re right. Do you know where
this is?’
‘No.’
He paused. ‘A fringe world. Now I come to think of it, I’ve forgotten its
name myself. I am happiest here, I think. This is where it starts for me. My
first great recovery, the dig that makes my name and reputation as an
archeoxenologist.’
‘It is later events we wish to speak of,’ said Voke.
Malahite nodded, untied his bandanna and wiped the sweat from his
cheeks. ‘But this is where it begins. I will be celebrated for these finds,
feted in high circles. Invited by the noble and famous House of Glaw to
dine with them and enter their service as a prospector. Urisel Glaw himself
will recruit me, and offer me a lucrative stipend to work for him.’
‘And where will that lead?’ I asked. ‘Tell us about the saruthi.’
He bristled and turned away. ‘Why? What can you offer me? Nothing!
You have destroyed me!’
‘We have means, Malahite. Things can be easier for you. The House of
Glaw has doomed you to an unthinkable fate.’
He caught my eye, curious intent. ‘You can save me? Even now?’
‘Yes.’
He paused and then picked up one of the trays. It was suddenly full of the
chipped octagonal tiles from the Damask site. ‘They had an empire, you
know,’ he said, sorting through the tiles, showing some to us. ‘The pieces
meant nothing. The history is here, inscribed pictographically. Our eyes do
not read it though. The saruthi have no optical or auditory functions. Smell
and taste, the two combined in fact, are their primary senses. They can
detect the flavours of reality, even those of dimensional space. The angles
of time.’
‘How?’
He shrugged. ‘The Necroteuch. It warped them. Their empire was small,
no more than forty worlds, and very old by the time the book came into
their possession. Carried by humans, fleeing persecution on Terra in the
very earliest days. Thanks to their taste-based sensory apparatus, they
derived from the Necroteuch more than a simple human eye could read.
From that first taste, the profound lore of the Necroteuch passed through
their culture like wildfire, like a pathogen, transforming and twisting,
investing them with great power. It led to war, civil war, which collapsed
their empire, leaving worlds burned out or abandoned, contracting their
territory to the far-flung fragment we know today.’
‘They are corrupted – as a species, I mean?’ asked Voke.
Malahite nodded. ‘Oh, there’s no saving them, inquisitor. They are
precisely the sort of xenos filth you people teach us to fear and despise. I
have encountered several alien races in my career, and found most to be
utterly undeserving of the hatred that the Inquisition and the church reserves
for anything that is not human. You are blinkered fools. You would kill
everything because it is not like you. But in this case, you are right. The
contagion of the Necroteuch has overwhelmed the saruthi. Never mind that
they are xenos, they are a Chaos breed.’
He shivered, as if a chill wind was picking up but the suns continued to
beat relentlessly.
‘What are their resources, their military capability?’
‘I have no idea,’ he said, shivering again. ‘They abandoned their
spaceship technology centuries ago. They had no further need of it. As I
said, the Necroteuch had warped their sensory abilities. They became able
to undo the angles of space and time, to move through dimensions. From
world to world. They mastered the art of constructing spaces in four
dimensions, environments that existed only at specific time-points.’
‘Like the one where the trade was meant to take place.’
‘Yes. KCX-1288 was once part of their empire, ravaged in their civil war.
They chose it for the meeting because it was remote from their main
population centres. They built the tetrascape inside specifically for us.’
‘Tetrascape?’
‘Forgive me. I coined the term. I thought I might use it in a learned paper
one day. A tailored, four-dimensional environment. In that particular case,
engineered with a human climate. We were their guests, you see.’
‘How was the deal arranged?’
‘Locke, the rogue trader. He was on a retainer to the House of Glaw, had
been for years. A mercenary roaming the stars at the behest of the Glaws.
He ventured into saruthi territory, and eventually made contact. Then he
discovered the existence of the Necroteuch, and knew what it would be
worth to his masters.’
‘And they agreed to trade?’ I was becoming impatient. Time, surely, was
running out.
He shuddered again. ‘It’s cold,’ he said. ‘Isn’t it? Getting colder.’
‘They agreed to trade? Come on, Malahite! We can’t help you if you
delay.’
‘Yes... yes, they agreed. In exchange for the return of artefacts and
treasures from worlds they had abandoned and no longer had access to.’
‘Wasn’t the Necroteuch precious to them?’
‘It was in their souls, in their minds, woven into their genetic code by
then. The book itself was incidental.’
‘And you were employed to excavate the materials that the Glaws
intended to trade?’
‘Of course. I was promised such power, you know...’
His voice tailed off. Beyond the distant mountains, the sky was growing
dark. A strengthening breeze scattered loose shale around our feet.
‘The rains?’ he said. ‘Surely not this early.’
‘Concentrate, Malahite, or you’ll slip away! The Necroteuch is
destroyed, the trade prevented, and House Glaw is shattered and defeated!
So why are Locke and Dazzo leading their fleet into saruthi territory?’
‘What’s that?’ he asked sharply, holding up a hand for quiet. It was
indeed colder now, and chasing clouds obscured the suns. A distant,
plaintive threnody was just audible.
‘What are they doing?’ Voke spat.
He looked at us as if we were stupid. ‘Repairing the damage you’ve done
to their cause! The high and mighty masters of the Glaw cabal have masters
of their own to please! Masters whose wrath defies thought! They must
assuage them for the loss of the Necroteuch!’
I looked across at Voke. ‘You mean the Children of the Emperor?’ I
asked Malahite.
‘Of course I do! The Glaws couldn’t do all this alone, even with their
power and influence. They made a pact with that foul chapter for support
and security, in return promising to share the Necroteuch with them. And
now that’s gone, the Children of the Emperor will be most displeased.’
‘And how do they hope to avoid this displeasure and make amends?’
Voke asked. Like me, he was becoming alarmed by the stain in the sky and
the sound in the wind.
‘By obtaining another Necroteuch,’ I said, realising, answering for
Malahite.
The archeoxenologist clapped his hands and smiled. ‘Brains, at last! Just
when I was giving up hope for you. Well done!’
‘There is another?’ asked Voke with a stammer.
‘The saruthi happily traded back their human copy because they had their
own,’ I said, cursing myself for not seeing the obvious sense before.
‘Well done again! Indeed they have, inquisitor,’ Malahite was gleeful and
smiling, though he was clearly shivering now, and desperate for warmth.
‘It’s a xenos transcription, of course, composed in their, I’d say language,
but perhaps flavour is a better word. However, the arcane knowledge it
contains is still the same. Dazzo and his masters will have the Necroteuch,
despite the set-backs you have caused.’
Lightning flashed, and the wind lifted walls of dust and storms of shale
particles around us.
‘Our time is up,’ Voke cried to me.
‘How true,’ said Malahite. ‘And now, your promise. I have answered you
fully. Are you men of your word?’
‘We can’t save you from death, Malahite,’ Voke told him. ‘But the
abominations you have chosen to align yourself with are coming to
consume your soul. We can at least be merciful and extinguish your spirit
now, before they arrive.’
Malahite grinned, flecks of shale clicking off his exposed teeth. ‘Damn
your offer, Commodus Voke. And damn you both.’
‘Move, Voke!’ I cried. Malahite had simply been keeping us talking,
padding his story out. He knew damn well we had nothing much to offer
him except a swift end. That didn’t interest him. He wanted revenge. That
was his price for speaking. He wanted to make sure we were still here,
when the end came, to die with him.
The desert behind him ruptured upwards, throwing rock and dust into the
cyclonic gale. A column of blood exploded out of the ground like a geyser,
half a kilometre wide and a dozen high. It rose like a gigantic tree, swirling
with pustular flesh, sinew, muscle, ragged tissue and a million staring eyes
that coated it like glistening foam.
Branch-like tendrils of bone and tissue whipped out from the swirling,
semi-fluid behemoth and tore Malahite apart.
It was the most complete, most devastating fate I have ever seen a man
suffer. But he was still smiling, triumphantly, as it happened.
TWENTY-TWO
In the mouth of the warp.
A mandate to purge.
56-Izar.
THE PSYCHICALLY MANIFESTED memory of the fringe world and its
excavation site blurred away, shattering like an image in a broken mirror.
But the towering daemon-form remained, keening in the lethal darkness,
driving the tempest of damnation down upon us.
I felt Voke lash out with his mind against the thing, but it was a futile
gesture, like a man exhaling into the face of a hurricane.
‘Back!’ I yelled, my voice lost and distant even to me.
I saw him falling into the void at my side, reaching for me. I yelled his
name again, holding out my hand. He cried out an answer I couldn’t hear.
Instead, I heard shouting, screaming and the blast of gunfire.
I SPRAWLED PAINFULLY onto the cold paved floor of the chapel, soaked
with blood and plasmic-residue, gasping for air, my heart bursting. The
noises now were all around me, deafening and clear.
I rolled.
Panic was emptying the chapel. Priests and novices alike, acolytes and
retainers, all were fleeing, wailing, overturning pews. Lord Rorken was on
his feet, his face pale, and his devoted bodyguard, with their saintly masks,
were charging forward, their broadswords whirring as they described
masterful figures of eight.
I saw Voke, unconscious, nearby. Like me, he was saturated with
inhuman gore and the drooling liquor of the immaterium.
I couldn’t find my balance, and there was a dullness in my head. I retched
clots of blood. I knew I was damned. Damned by the warp, ruined and
stained. I had strayed too close too long.
The astropaths were staggering backwards, frantic, shrieking. Some were
already dead, and others were convulsing or haemorrhaging. As I looked
up, two exploded simultaneously, like blood-filled blisters. Arcs of warp-
energy flashed among them, frying minds, fusing bones and boiling body
fluid.
Malahite’s corpse had gone. In its place on the plinth, crouched a
thrashing, screeching horror of smoke and rotting bone. The astropaths had
broken the link, having staunchly sustained it long enough for Voke and I to
escape. But something had come back with us.
It had no form, but suggested many, as a shadow on a wall or a cloud in
the sky might flicker and resemble many things in a passing moment. Inside
its fluttering robes of smoke, starlight shone and teeth flashed.
The first of Rorken’s bodyguards was on it, slicing with his sword. The
razor-keen blade, engraved with votive blessings and curial sacraments,
passed harmlessly through wispy, ethereal fog.
In response, a long, attenuated claw of jointed bone, like a scythe with
human teeth growing from the blade edge, lashed out and chopped through
his torso and his holy blade, bisecting both.
I fumbled for a weapon, any damn weapon.
There was a cacophony of gunfire.
Storm bolters blasting, the three Deathwatch Marines advanced towards
the horror. Their black armour was rimed with psychic frost. Over his vox-
speaker, Cynewolf could be heard, admonishing the foe and barking tactical
instructions to his comrades.
Their chapter-wrought bolters continued to boom in unison until the
unremitting fire had blasted the thing from the warp backwards in a
scrambling, shrieking smear of blackness and bone limbs. It fell back off
the plinth into the retreating astropaths, crashing dead and living alike.
Brother-Captain Cynewolf moved ahead of his companions, faster than
seemed to me possible for such a heavily armoured form. Tossing aside his
spent bolter, he drew his chainsword and hacked again and again into the
writhing mass, driving it backwards into the adulatory stalls, which
splintered like tinder wood.
Lord Rorken strode past me, wielding a ceremonial silver flamer he had
snatched from one of his attendants. The acolyte ran behind, struggling to
hold on to the gold-inlaid fuel tanks and keep pace with his master.
Rorken’s voice sang out above the mayhem. ‘Spirit of noxious
immateria, be gone from hence, for as the Emperor of Mankind, manifold
be his blessings, watches over me, so I will not fear the shadow of the
warp...’
Holy fire spurted from the Lord Inquisitor’s weapon and washed across
the warp-spawned thing. Lord Rorken was chanting the rite of banishment
at the top of his lungs.
Endor pulled me to my feet and we both lent our voices to the words.
There was a tremor that seemed to vibrate the entire ship. Then nothing
remained of the vile creature except a layer of ash and the devastation it had
wrought.
AS PENANCE FOR the act of transgression that had led to this warp-
invasion, Konrad Molitor was charged with rededicating and reconsecrating
the violated chapel. The work, overseen by the arch-priests of the curia and
the techno-adepts of the Glorious Omnissiah, took all of the first six weeks
of our ten-week transit time to 56-Izar. Molitor took his duties seriously,
dressed himself in a filthy sackcloth shirt of contrition, and had his retainers
scourge him with withes and psychic awls between ceremonies. I thought
he got off lightly.
I SPENT A month recovering from the physiological trauma of the auto-
séance in one of the battleship’s state apartments. The psychological
damage I suffered during that event lasted for years after. I still dream of
that geyser of blood, clothed in myriad eyes, filling the sky. You don’t
forget a thing like that. They say memory softens with time, but that
particular memory never has. Even today, I console myself that to have
forgotten would have been worse. That would have been denial, and denial
of such visions eventually opens the doors of insanity.
I lay upon the apartment’s wide bed all month, propped up with bolsters
and pillows. Physicians attended me regularly, as did members of Lord
Rorken’s staff, dressed in their finery. They tested my health, my mind, my
recovering strength. I knew what they were looking for. A taint of the warp.
There was none, I was sure, but they couldn’t take my word for it, of
course. We had come close, Voke and I, close to the precipice, close to the
edge of irreconcilable damnation. Another few seconds...
Aemos stayed with me, bringing me books and slates to divert me.
Sometimes he read aloud, from histories, sermons or stories. Sometimes he
played music spools on the old, horn-speakered celiaphone, cranking the
handle by hand. We listened to the light orchestral preludes of Daminias
Bartelmew, the rousing symphonies of Hanz Solveig, the devotional chants
of the Ongres Cloisterhood. He warbled along with operettas by Guinglas
until I pleaded with him to stop, and mimed the conductor’s role when the
Macharius Requiem played, dancing around the room on his augmetic legs
in such a preposterous, sprightly fashion it made me laugh aloud.
‘It’s good to hear that, Gregor,’ he said, blowing dust off a new spool
before fitting it into the celiaphone.
I was going to answer, but the strident war-hymns of the Mordian
Regimental Choir cut me off.
MIDAS VISITED ME, and spent time playing regicide or plucking his
Glavian lyre. I took these recitals as a particular compliment. He’d been
dragging the lyre around for years, ever since I had first met him, and had
never played in my hearing, despite my requests.
He was a master, his circuit-inlaid fingers reading and playing the coded
strings as expertly as they did flight controls.
On his third visit, after a trio of jaunty Glavian dances, he set his turtle-
backed instrument down against the arm of his chair and said ‘Lowink is
dead.’
I closed my eyes and nodded. I had suspected as much.
‘Aemos didn’t want to tell you yet, given your condition, but I thought it
was wrong to keep it from you.’
‘Was it quick?’
‘His body survived the séance invasion, but with no mind to speak of. He
died a week later. Just faded away.’
‘Thank you, Midas. It is best I know. Now play again, so I can lose
myself in your tunes.’
STRANGELY, I CAME to enjoy Bequin’s visits most. She would bustle in,
tidying around me, tut-tutting at the state of my water jug or the collapse of
my bolsters. Then she would read aloud, usually from books and slates
Aemos had left, and often from works that he had already declaimed for my
edification. She read them better, with more colour and phlegm. The voice
she put on to do Sebastian Thor made me laugh so hard my ribs hurt. When
she got to reading Kerloff’s Narrative of the Horus War, her impersonation
of the Emperor was almost heretical.
I taught her regicide. She lost the first few games, mesmerised by the
pieces, the complex board and the still more complex moves and strategies.
It was all too ‘tactical’ for her, she announced. There was no ‘incentive’. So
we started to play for coins. Then she got the gist and started to win. Every
time.
When Midas visited me next, he said sourly, ‘Have you been teaching
that girl to play?’
TOWARDS THE END of my third week of recuperation, Bequin arrived in
my apartment and declared, ‘I have brought a visitor.’
The ruined side of Godwyn Fischig’s face had been rebuilt with augmetic
muscle and metal, and shrouded with a demi-visage mask of white
ceramite. His lost arm had also been replaced, with a powerful metal
prosthetic. He was clad in a simple, black jacket and breeches.
He sat at my bedside, and wished me a speedy recovery.
‘Your courage has not been forgotten, Godwyn,’ I said. ‘When this
undertaking is over, you may wish to return to your duties on Hubris, but I
would welcome your presence on my staff, if you choose so.’
‘Nissemay Carpel be damned,’ he said. ‘The High Custodian of the
Dormant Vaults may call for me, but I know where I want to be. This life
has purpose. I would stay here in it.’
Fischig remained at my side for hours, long into the night, by ship-time.
We talked, and joked occasionally, and then played regicide with Bequin
looking on. At first, his problems in manipulating the pieces with his
unfamiliar new limb afforded us plenty of amusement. Only when he had
beaten me in three straight games did he admit that Bequin, in her infinite
wisdom, had been coaching him for the past few weeks.
I HAD ONE last visitor, a day or two before I was finally able to walk and
go about my business uninterrupted by periods of fatigue. Heldane wheeled
him in on a wire-spoked carrier chair.
Voke was shrunken and ill. He could only speak by way of a vox-
enhancer. I was sure he would be dead in a matter of months.
‘You saved me, Eisenhorn,’ he husked, haltingly, through the vox
augmetic.
‘The astropaths made it possible for us to live,’ I corrected.
Voke shook his gnarled, sunken head. ‘No... I was lost in a realm of
damnation, and you pulled me back. Your voice. I heard you call my name
and it was enough. Without that, without that voice, I would have
succumbed to the warp.’
I shrugged. What could I say?
‘We are not alike, Gregor Eisenhorn,’ he continued, tremulously. ‘Our
concept of inquisition is wildly at variance. But still I salute your bravery
and your dedication. You have proven yourself in my eyes. Different ways,
different means, is that not the true ethic of our order? I will die peacefully
– and soon, I think – knowing men such as you maintain the fight.’
I was honoured. Whatever I thought of his modus operandi, I knew our
purposes pointed in the same direction.
With a weak gesture he beckoned Heldane forward. The man’s raw,
damaged head was no prettier than when I had last seen it.
‘I want you to trust Heldane. Of all my students, he is the best. I intend to
recommend his elevation to the level of high interrogator, and from there,
inquisitional rank beckons. If I die, look to him for my sake. I have no
doubt the Inquisition will benefit from his presence.’
I promised Voke I would do so, and this seemed to please Heldane. I
didn’t like the man much, but he had been resilient and unfaltering in the
face of savage death, and there was no doubting his ability or dedication.
Voke took my hand in his sweaty claw and rasped ‘Thank you, brother.’
AS IT TURNED out, Commodus Voke lived on for another one hundred and
three years. He proved nigh on impossible to kill. When Golesh Constantine
Pheppos Heldane was finally elected to the rank of inquisitor, it was all
Voke’s doing. The sins of the father, as they say.
INVASION TRAINING BEGAN three weeks off 56-Izar. Initially, Admiral
Spatian’s plan was for a fleet action, a simple annihilation of any targets
from orbit. But Lord Rorken and the Deathwatch insisted that a physical
invasion was required. The recovery and destruction of the xenos
Necroteuch had to be authenticated, or we would never know for sure that it
was truly gone. Only after that objective was achieved could extreme
destructive sanction be unleashed on 56-Izar.
All that could be learned from my associates and the surviving
Gudrunites concerning the saruthi tetrascapes – ironically, we were using
Malahite’s term by then – was collated during a scrupulously searching
series of interviews conducted by naval tacticians and Brytnoth, the
Deathwatch’s revered librarian and strategist.
The collected information was profiled by the fleet’s cogitators, and
simulations created to acclimatise the ground forces. To my eyes, the
simulations conveyed nothing of the wrongness we had experienced on the
world of the plateau.
Brytnoth himself conducted my interviews, accompanied by Olm
Madorthene. Shaven-headed, a giant of a man even without his armour,
Brytnoth was nevertheless cordial and attentive, addressing me with respect
and listening with genuine interest to my replies. I tried to do verbal justice
to my memories of the experience, and additionally related the theories that
Malahite had expounded during that fateful séance.
Eschewing the luxury of a servitor scribe or clerk, Brytnoth made his
own notes as he listened. I found myself engrossed watching the warrior’s
paw working the dwarfed stylus almost delicately across the note-slate.
We sat in my apartments for the sessions, which often lasted hours.
Bequin brought in regular trays of hot mead or leaf infusions, and Brytnoth
actually extended his little finger as he lifted the porcelain cups by the
handle. He was to me the embodiment of war in peacetime, a vast power
bound into genteel behaviour, striving to prevent his awesome strength
from breaking loose. He would lift the cup, small finger extended, consult
his notes and ask another question before sipping.
The fact that small finger was the size and shape of an Arbites’ truncheon
was beside the point.
‘What I’m trying to establish, brother inquisitor, is whether the
environments of the saruthi xenos will hinder our forces or deprive them of
optimum combat efficiency.’
‘You can be sure of that, brother librarian.’ I poured some more Olicet tea
from the silver pot. ‘My comrades were disoriented for the entire duration
of the mission, and the Gudrunite riflemen had broken because of the place
more than anything else. There is a wrongness that quite disarms the senses.
It had been conjectured by some that this is a deliberate effect used by the
saruthi to undermine sentients used to three physical dimensions, but the
traitor Malahite made more sense in my opinion. The wrongness is a by-
product of the saruthi’s preferred environments. We can expect the effect to
be the norm on any homeworld of theirs.’
Brytnoth nodded and noted again.
‘I’m sure your chapter’s experience and specialised sensor equipment
will be a match for it,’ put in Madorthene. ‘Myself, I’m worried about the
guard. They’ll be the mainstay of this action.’
‘They’ve all seen the preliminary briefing simulations,’ Brytnoth
murmured.
‘With respect, I have too and they hardly do justice to the places we will
find ourselves in.’ I looked across the table into Brytnoth’s face. His rugged
features were sunken and colourless, the common trait of one who spends
most of his life hidden within a combat helmet. His hooded eyes regarded
me with interest. What wars, what victories, had those eyes witnessed, I
wondered. What defeats?
‘What do you suggest?’ Brytnoth asked.
‘Adverse cross-training,’ I replied. I’d thought about it long and hard.
‘Olm here knows I’m no military man, brother-librarian, but that’s the way
it seems to me. Make the troops practise overburden and off-balance.
Blindfold them in some exercises, cuff them in others, alter gravity in the
training vaults. Make the weighted packs they carry off centre and
awkward. Switch light levels without warning. Crank the temperature and
air pressure up and down. Simply make it hard for them. Train them to run,
cover, shoot and reload in off-putting extremes. Make them learn all their
essential combat procedures so well they can do them anywhere, under any
circumstances. When they hit the ground at 56-Izar, let the fight be all they
worry about. Everything else should be instinctive.’
Madorthene smiled confidently. ‘The infantry forces at our disposal are
primarily navy troopers and Mirepoix light elite from the Imperial Guard,
seasoned soldiers all, unlike the poor Gudrunite foundees you had to
nursemaid, Gregor. We’ll put them through the hoops and raise their game
for the big push. They’ve got the combat hours and the balls to do it.’
‘Don’t stint,’ I warned Madorthene. ‘And those foundees you refer to –
Sergeant Jeruss and his men. I want them with me when I go in.’
‘Gregor! We can give you a crack squad of Mirepoix who—’
‘I want the Gudrunite survivors.’
‘Why?’ asked Brytnoth.
‘Because whatever their combat inexperience, they’ve seen a tetrascape.
Those are the men I want at my side.’
Madorthene and Brytnoth exchanged glances, and the procurator
shrugged. ‘As you wish.’
‘As for the others, like I said, don’t stint on the training regime.’
‘We won’t!’ he chuckled, mock-outraged at the idea. ‘The drill masters
will work the regiments so hard, they’ll yearn for real battle.’
‘I’m serious,’ I said. ‘Every man that deploys on to 56-Izar – the
venerated Deathwatch chapter included, Emperor bless them – should be
ready to lose control of his senses, his judgment, his fortitude and even his
basic mental faculties. They’re going to be hit hard, but in an insidious way.
I don’t care if every man jack of them forgets his own mother’s name and
wets himself, they must still know how to hold a line, fire and reload, adore
the Emperor and respond to orders.’
‘Succinctly put,’ Brytnoth said. ‘I will, of course, temper your proposals
before I put them to my battle brothers.’
‘I don’t care what you tell them,’ I chuckled, ‘as long as you don’t let on
who it came from.’
‘Your anonymity is assured,’ He smiled. A wonder, that. I consider
myself one of the very few mortals to have made a librarian of the Adeptus
Astartes smile. To have seen a librarian of the Adeptus Astartes smile even.
Brytnoth pushed his slate and stylus aside and looked over at me with
curiosity. ‘Mandragore,’ he said.
‘The bastard child of the Emperor? What of him?’
‘I’m told you killed him yourself. In single combat. Quite a feat for one
such as you – and I mean no disrespect.’
‘No disrespect is taken.’
‘How did you do it?’ he asked frankly.
I told him. I kept it simple. Brytnoth made no reaction but Madorthene
was quietly agog.
‘Brother-Captain Cynewolf will be fascinated,’ Brytnoth said. ‘I
promised him I’d find out the details. He was dying to ask you about it, but
he didn’t dare.’
Now that was funny.
WE PREPARED OURSELVES for the approaching war. It was going to be
arduous, and, unlike most campaigns, not divided into two sides. I observed
training sessions, impressed by the efforts and the discipline. I even had the
terrifying pleasure of watching Captain Cynewolf s kill-team conduct a
target-decoy hunt through the hold levels. We were ready. Ready as we’d
ever be.
IN THE NINTH WEEK of transit, Lord Inquisitor Rorken and Admiral
Spatian issued a joint declaration, officially enforced by will of the
Ecclesiarchy A Mandate To Purge 56-Izar, as the term and parameters are
understood in the Imperial codes. That was the seal on the action. There
was no turning back now. We were heading through the immaterium at high
warp to invade and, if necessary, destroy the saruthi world.
THROUGH MY WEEKS of convalescence, I dreamed little. But on the last
night before our arrival at 56-Izar, the blank-eyed, handsome man returned
to stalk the landscape of my dreams.
He was talking to me, but I couldn’t hear his words, nor understand his
purpose. He led me through drafty halls in a ruined palace, and then
departed silently into the dream wilds beyond, leaving me alone, naked, in a
ruin that tottered and crumbled down onto me.
The saruthi were in my dreams too. They rose through the brick debris of
the collapsed palace effortlessly, finding angles and pathways that I could
not see. The multiple nostrils on their swaying heads flared as they got the
taste of me. Their skulls coruscated with energy...
I WOKE, SOAKED with night-sweat, more out of my wide bed than in it.
Dislodged bolsters were scattered over the floor.
The vox-link on my night stand was beeping.
‘Inquisitor Eisenhorn?’
‘Sorry to wake you,’ said Madorthene. ‘But I thought you’d want to
know. The fleet exited the immaterium twenty-six minutes ago. We are
entering invasion orbit of 56-Izar.’
TWENTY-THREE
Invading the invasion.
Bent angles.
In the gardens of the saruthi.
THE WAR HAD already begun.
56-Izar hung like a pearl in space, milky white and gleaming. Vivid
flashes and slower blossoms of destruction underlit its translucent skin of
cloud. The heretic fleet had arrived two days ahead of us, and had begun its
assault of the planet.
I kept thinking of it as Estrum’s fleet, but it wasn’t of course. I’d made
certain of that. This was Locke’s battle fleet now, I was sure.
The thirteen ships had blockaded 56-Izar in a non-standard but effective
conquest pattern. Serial waves of their fighter-bombers, interceptors and
dropships rained down on the planet and the orbiting heavies bombarded
the surface with their entire batteries.
They detected our battle-pack the moment we came out of warp. Their
picket ships, the heavy destroyers Nebuchadnezzar and Fournier, wheeled
round to protect their hindquarters. Admiral Spatian held our battle-pack off
orbit and chased the frigates Defence of Stalinvast, Emperor’s Hammer and
Will of Iron straight in to clear the way.
On their heels, he sent out the massed fighter squadrons of the
expeditionary force, and diverted the battleship Vulpecula to engage the
enemy flagship, a heavy cruiser named the Leoncour.
The Emperor’s Hammer and the Will of Iron pincered and torched the
Nebuchadnezzar after a brief but fierce exchange. The explosion lit the
void.
The Defence of Stalinvast and the Fournier locked each other tightly in a
longer, slower dance of warships, and eventually slammed together,
squeezing boarding parties and naval security units into each other’s hulls.
The locked ships tumbled away, in an embrace of death.
The Vulpecula raced forward and misjudged the Leoncour’s evasion,
suffering a trio of broadsides. Coming about, spilling debris into the gulf,
the Imperial battleship raised its guns and hammered the Leoncour so hard
and so furiously that the enemy flagship broke up and blew out like a dying
sun.
Limping, the Vulpecula turned slowly and began its long-range harrying
of the enemy ships closer to the target world’s atmosphere. Spatian
committed the rest of his group then, ranging them forward in a three-
pronged division, of which the central and largest was headed by the
majestic Saint Scythus.
Distances closed. The near-space of 56-Izar was awash with fire patterns
and the streaking comets of missiles. Now the ferocious, high-velocity
small ship phase began as waves of interceptors and light bombers from
both fleets met and buzzed around each other like rival swarms of insects.
The tiny lights whirled and danced in the void, faster and more numerous
than the unaided eye could follow. Even the tactical displays overwhelmed
the senses: pict-plates flickering with thousands of type markers and
flashing cursors, spinning, overlaying, vanishing and reappearing.
The heretics had seeded a buffer zone behind their deployment with
mines, and the Emperor’s Hammer, spurring forward in a fleet intruder role,
suffered heavy damage and was forced to break away. Heretic interceptors
fell upon the stricken ship like carrion flies on a dying beast.
The Will of Iron moved past the Emperor’s Hammer and began to sweep
a path through the mine zone with its specialised clearing devices.
Triggered by probing force cones, the floating weapons began to detonate in
their thousands.
Spatian’s intent was to cut a wedge into the enemy’s wide formation and
bring at least some of his ships within range of the planet’s surface. Once
that bridging objective was achieved he could begin to unleash the
planetary assault, confident of providing the dropships with some covering
fire.
The Saint Scythus was first to secure such a position. Its main guns
mercilessly disposed of the heretic cruiser Scutum and forced the carrier
frigate Glory of Algol into a desperate retreat.
Hundreds of dropships rushed like a blizzard out of the battleship and the
two frigates and the Inquisitorial black ship that had moved in behind it.
Most of the dropships were the grey landing boats of the Imperial Guard,
jets firing as they hammered down into the cloudy atmosphere of 56-Izar.
But scattered among them were a handful of scarab-black landing craft and
drop-pods of the Deathwatch chapter.
The counter-invasion had begun.
WITHIN THE FIRST hour of the war, we managed to land more than two-
thirds of our one hundred and twenty thousand Mirepoix Light Elite
Infantry on the surface of 56-Izar, almost half of the motorised armour
brigades, and all sixty Adeptus Astartes warriors of the Deathwatch.
Sensor sweeps showed 56-Izar to be a bland, unremarkable world
beneath its heavy veil of atmosphere. Vast, low continents of inorganic ooze
punctured by ranges of crystalline upland and surrounded by inert chemical
oceans. The only signs of advanced life – of life of any kind, indeed – were
a string of city-sized structures arranged in a chain along the equatorial
region of the main continent. The nature and composition of these
structures was virtually impossible to read from orbit. The heretics had
concentrated their invasion efforts on the three largest structures, and
Admiral Spatian was targeting these areas, judging that the enemy would
not be wasting time invading unviable sites.
Losses were high. The approaches were thick with enemy interceptors,
micro-mines and the fire of surface to air defences. All of this was human
warfare. There was no sign or hint of any saruthi participation at all.
Behind the main landing force came the Inquisitorial squads, five
specialised assault units designed to follow the military in through the
opening they made and oversee the primary objectives: the capture or
destruction of the heretic conspirators and the obliteration of any further
Necroteuch material. I had control of one squad; the others were led by
Endor, Schongard, Molitor and Lord Inquisitor Rorken himself. Voke was
too ill to command a squad, and his emissary, Heldane, accompanied
Endor’s party.
My own force, designated Purge Two, was made up of twenty Gudrunite
riflemen, Bequin, Midas and a Deathwatch Space Marine called Guilar. A
member of the Astartes had been seconded to each inquisitor. Fischig had
demanded to accompany me, but he was still weak from his injuries and
surgery and I had turned him down with a heavy heart. He remained on the
battleship with Aemos, who was, by any standards, a non-combatant.
Our transport, an Imperial Guard dropship, left the Saint Scythus directly
behind the force designated Purge One, in Lord Rorken’s lander. We rode
out the vibrating, shuddering descent strapped into the g-chairs of the troop
bay.
Jeruss’s men sang as we dropped. Their standard-issue Gudrunite
uniforms had been augmented with fresh body armour from the fleet stores,
and they had sewn inquisitorial emblems onto their sleeves next to the
regimental badge of the 50th Gudrunite Rifles. They were in good humour,
eager and determined, encouraged, I believe, by the faith I had shown in
selecting them. Madorthene had confided to me that they had scored
consistently above average in the adverse training program. They joked and
boasted and rang out Imperial battle hymns like veterans. Their experiences
since the founding at Dorsay had baptised them very quickly indeed.
Bequin had also been transmuted by experience in the months since I had
first met her on Hubris. A hard, serious woman had replaced the scatty,
selfish pleasure-girl from the Sun-dome, as if she had at last found a calling
that suited her. She had certainly thrown herself into her new life with
dedication and vigour. I considered the changes a distinct improvement.
Many are called to the service of our beloved Emperor, and many are found
wanting. Despite the ordeals, Alizabeth Bequin had proved herself. If there
was a point at which her transformation could be identified, it was the
plateau. The sight of Mandragore’s corpse had exorcised her fears.
Dressed in a black, armoured bodyglove and a long black velvet coat, she
sat in the seat next to me, scrupulously checking her las-carbine. The
chastener had trained her well. Her gloved hands made swift, professional
movements over the weapon. Only the trim of black feathers around her
coat’s collar betrayed a vestige of the painted, frocked and decorated girl of
old.
Midas sat the other side of me, ill at ease. He made a lousy passenger and
I knew he wanted to be up in the dropship’s cockpit instead of the navy
pilot. He wore his cerise jacket, despite the objections of the dour Guilar,
who considered its brash colour ‘unsuitable for combat’. His needle pistols
were holstered, and his long Glavian rifle rested across his knees.
I wore brown leather body armour and my button-sleeve coat for the
assault, a trade off between protection and mobility. The symbols of my
office were proudly displayed on my chest above my sash. Librarian
Brytnoth, in a gesture that honoured me, had sent a bolt pistol for my
personal use. It was a compact, hand-crafted model with a casing of matt-
green steel. The rectangular-pattern magazines slid into the handgrip, and I
had one locked in place and another eight in the loops of my belt.
After eight minutes of violent descent, we levelled out and the vibrations
diminished. Guilar, seated next to the ramp-hatch, made the sign of the
aquila in the air and locked his helmet into place.
‘Twenty seconds!’ the pilot announced over the cabin vox.
WE SOARED DOWN free of the clouds and into the fire and darkness of the
near-surface warzone, moving at full burn towards one of the orbitally
identified city structures. The site was ringed by a series of what seemed to
be colossal lakes or reservoirs, and the liquid they contained was ablaze,
with raging walls of fire reaching up thousands of metres. Night-black
smoke fanned from the fires and blocked the immediate daylight, and the
world below was amber-lit by the seething flames and the crossfire of
weapons.
The dropship shook as the braking jets fired, and we lurched around in a
drunken yaw before settling. Guilar thumped a wall-stud and the ramp-
doors opened with a yowl of metal on metal. Cold air and smoke blew into
the cabin.
We came out onto a wide, glistening flat of white mud that squelched
wetly under our running, jumping boots. The mudflats lay between two of
the burning lakes, and we could feel the heat of the immense fires on our
faces. The coiling flames reflected in dazzling patterns off the wet mud.
Burning debris from a crashed lander littered the white flats, as well as
the charred bodies of several Mirepoix. Las-fire cut the air above us. A
kilometre ahead there were the familiar shapes of raised, hoop-like arches,
‘tetragates’ as they had been dubbed by the fleet’s tech-priests, some
shattered and broken by the assault. Beyond them rose the pearl-white
flanks of a great edifice, the target structure, curved and segmented like a
gigantic sea-shell, spotted with a thousand tiny scorch marks and blast-
scars.
We advanced behind Guilar. The air smelled of fuel-vapour and another
rich scent, like liquorice, that I couldn’t readily identify.
‘Purge Two, deploying on surface at chart mark seven,’ I reported over
the vox.
‘Understood, Purge Two. Purge One and Purge Four report safe landing
and deployment.’
So Rorken and Molitor’s groups were down. No word yet of Endor or
Schongard.
As we pushed past the first of the shattered hoops, Guilar faltered,
pausing to shake his helmeted head. I could feel the wrongness already, the
insidious twisting of the saruthi environment. It seemed likely the effect
was being accentuated by the broken tetragates. These silent devices
projected and sustained the saruthi tetrascapes, and they were now faulty
and incomplete.
The Gudrunites noticed it too, but seemed unfazed.
‘Take point!’ I told Jeruss, and Guilar looked at me sharply.
‘You need time to get used to this, Brother Guilar. Don’t argue.’
Jeruss and three Gudrunites moved into the vanguard. Even they were
having trouble, shambling awkwardly as if intoxicated. The angles of space
and time were truly bent and twisted here.
Behind us, thrusters retched and our dropship rose off the gleaming mud,
its ramp and landing struts folding up into its belly. It was barely sixty
metres up when a missile struck it amidships and blew out its mainframe.
The burning cockpit section tumbled away from the airburst and fell into a
lake of fire. Metal debris from the destroyed main section peppered the
white mud below.
But for the grace of the God-Emperor, we could all have been aboard it.
Moving at an unsteady trot, we came to the saruthi edifice. Its great,
luminous form was the size of an Imperial hive and its foundations ran
down beneath the white mud. I tried to get a sense of the structure, but it
was no good and I quickly gave up rather than risk disorientation. It was
like an ammonite with its polished segments and perfect curves, but my
human eyes could not read its true shape. The overlaps and edges did not
meet as one would expect, and conjured distracting optical illusions when
any attempt was made to follow them from one point to another.
We reached the foot of it. There were no doors or entrances, and those
who had come before us had tried to blast their way through the lustrous
surface, only to find it apparently solid within.
I moved my squad back from the barrier and we retraced our approach
down the line of the tetragates. Those nearest to the structure were still
intact.
As I had anticipated, we stepped through the last one and were
immediately inside the edifice, as if we had passed through the pearly walls.
Inside, there was a low radiance shed by some source inside the walls. It
was warm, and the smell of liquorice was more pungent and intense. The
floor, translucent and pearly, was concave and flowed up into the curve of
the walls.
We moved forward, weapons ready. The corridor – and I use that word in
the loosest sense – seemed to describe a spiral, like the inner form of a great
conch or the canals of a human ear, but at no time did we feel anything but
upright.
Opening into a horn-like cone, the spiral gave out into a huge, almost
spherical chamber. It was impossible to estimate its true size, or define its
true shape. It seemed to be some kind of ornamental garden or even farm.
Silver walkways, suspended invisibly by gravity or some other force, ran
between curving tanks of liquid that formed beds for huge, multi-coloured
cycads and other bulbous, primitive plants. The fleshy growths towered
around us, dripping with moisture and swathed in creepers and climbing
succulents. Ropes of vine and beards of flowering foliage hung from
invisible fixtures in the air above the beds. There were insects in here,
flitting between the swollen bell-shapes, crescents and columns of the
gigantic vegetation. One landed on my sleeve and I swatted it, noticing with
revulsion that it had five legs, three wings and no symmetry.
We followed the silver path. It passed through a tetragate, and at once we
found ourselves in another garden chamber, similarly filled with glossy,
abundant plant life thriving in sculptural tanks. The tallest growths in here –
giant yellowish horsetails streaked with orange veins – rose eighty or ninety
metres above the floating pathway.
Guilar called a word of alarm, and his storm bolter began to fire, raking
across this second chamber from the silver path on which we walked. The
shots burst gourd-like plants in fibrous bursts of sap and hacked shreds of
leaf and tendril into the air.
Return fire came at us. Las-fire and the crack of autorifles. Through the
sickly growths of this indoor jungle, the soldiers of the heretics moved
against us.
TWENTY-FOUR
Purge Two engages.
A silent revolution.
Dazzo’s triumph.
THEY CAME THROUGH the plant growth, along the silver paths, blasting,
men clad in the stained uniforms of the 50th Gudrunite Rifles and the black
armour of the naval security detail. Two of the Gudrunites in my squad
toppled and fell from the path, their corpses disappearing into the oily
waters of the tanks below. But most of the enemy gunfire was going wild.
Purge Two countered, lasguns barking. I moved to the front of the group
and began firing my bolt pistol. There was precious little room for
manoeuvre on the silver walkway, and even less cover.
My first shot went wide, so wide I wondered if the bolter was misaligned.
Then I remembered the devious nature of the sarathi tetrascape and
compensated. Two shots, two satisfying hits. Bequin and Midas both had
the trick of it too, and Jeruss’s boys were learning.
Guilar made a lot of noise, ripping through the gardens with his storm
bolter. But it seemed to me he was still discomforted by the environment.
It was a salutary moment. To see one of the god-like warriors I have
regarded with great awe ever since the day, thirty years ago, when I
watched the White Scars take Almanadae, become fallible. For all his
power, courage, superhuman vigour and advanced weapons, he was
achieving nothing, whereas Yeltun, the youngest of the Gudrun boys, had
made three kills already.
Was it arrogance? Overconfidence in his own abilities?
‘Guilar! Brother Guilar! Adjust your fire!’
I heard him curse something about insolence, and move ahead down the
path, detonating plant bulks with his shots.
‘Why doesn’t the bastard listen?’ Midas complained, sighting his Glavian
rifle and decapitating a heretic trooper at one hundred metres.
‘Close up!’ I ordered. ‘Jeruss! Frag them!’
Jeruss and three others began to lob frag grenades over the thickets.
Explosive flashes blew water ooze and vegetable matter up from the tanks,
and the air became foggy with plant fibre and sappy moisture.
There was an abrupt change in tone in the enemy fire. The boom of a
bolter rang out over the crack and snipe of the laser weapons.
I looked down the silver path in time to see Guilar jerk backwards as
multiple bolter rounds struck his chest plate. With a cry of rage rather than
pain, he went over, off the path, into the bubbling water of the tank behind
us and vanished.
Thrusting the heretic foot soldiers out of the way, his killer came down
the pathway towards us.
‘Oh no!’ Bequin cried. ‘Please-by-the-Golden-Throne-no!’
Another of the Emperor’s Children, the brother if not the twin of foul
Mandragore. His scintillating cloak blew out behind him, and his steel-shod
hooves shook the path. He was bellowing like a bull auroch. His bolter spat
and the Gudrunite beside me burst apart.
The Children of the Emperor, shadowy sponsors of this entire enterprise,
were here to protect their investment. Had they come, unbidden, after
Mandragore’s death? Had Dazzo or Locke summoned them?
I fired the bolter at him, joining the fusillade of desperate weapons blasts
that Purge Two levelled in a frantic attempt to slow him down. Fear made
the men forget the best of their training, and many of the shots were wild.
He didn’t seem to feel those few that struck his armour.
‘Purge Two! This is Purge Two! The Children of the Emperor are here!’ I
yelled into my vox. I knew I would be dead in an instant. It was imperative
that Fleet Command knew of this dire development.
A black shape burst up from the dark water, cascading froth and ooze in
all directions. Brother Guilar slammed into the Chaos Marine, wrenching
him over, and they both fell thrashing into the adjacent tank. Something,
probably the heretic’s bolter, fired repeatedly underwater and the side of the
tank below the floating path splintered out in a rash of liquid. The soupy
water flooded out, draining away into the gullies between the garden
structures. As the fluid level dropped, the titanic combatants emerged,
blackened with mire, wrestling and trading inhuman blows among the
tangled roots and feeder tubes of the tank’s murky bottom.
Ceramite-cased fists pounded into armour plates. Chips of plasteel flew
from the impacts. The Chaos Marine’s vast paws clawed at Guilar, tearing
at his visor and shoulder guards. Guilar drove him backwards, his feet
churning in the shallow, thick water. They slammed in the bole of a cycad.
The enemy grappled, getting a better grip, stabbing a jagged gauntlet spike
through the armpit seal of the Deathwatch’s imperator armour. Guilar
staggered, and as he fell back, a massive backhanded slap knocked him
over and tore his helmet off.
The Chaos Marine landed on the sprawling Guilar, tearing at his throat,
driving fists like boulders into his face.
There was a bang of weapon discharge and a flash. His face destroyed
and his collapsed skull burning from the inside, the Chaos filth fell back
into the swamp water.
Guilar rose, unsteady, his storm bolter in his hand, blood pouring from
the wounds in his face and neck.
It was a formidable victory. Jeruss and his men cheered and whooped and
then renewed their advance on the remaining heretics. The enemy, resolve
lost, pulled back and vanished into the dense thickets of the gardens.
Dripping, Guilar climbed back onto the path and looked down at me.
‘I’m glad you’re still with us, Brother Guilar,’ I said.
WE TRACED THE paths on through the gardens of the saruthi, unopposed.
The enemy dead we passed – floating in the tanks or sprawled on the
pathways – had signs of branding on their faces. Chaos marks, burned into
the skin by evil rather than heat. Admiral Spatian had hoped that some of
the heretic forces, especially the Gudrunite Imperial Guard, might yet be
restored to the Imperial cause. Like Jeruss and his men, most had been
unwilling pawns caught up in Estrum’s treason, and the fleet tacticians had
presented models of victory wherein Locke and Dazzo found the bulk of
their ground forces turning against them.
Such a hope was dashed. The minds of these good men had been burned
away and poisoned by Chaos. The heretics had enforced the loyalty of their
stolen armies.
VIA TETRAGATES WE advanced, passing through six more garden spheres,
then on into wide, tiled courtyards and halls of asymmetrical pillars whose
function we could not imagine. Twice, we had brief skirmishes with heretic
forces, driving them back into the warped cavities of the edifice. More
often, we could hear ferocious war, full-blown battles that seemed right at
hand but of which there was no visual or physical trace.
Contact with fleet command was fragmentary. Purge One – Lord
Rorken’s party – was locked in combat somewhere, and nothing had been
heard of Molitor’s Purge Four. Schongard’s group, Purge Five, was lost
somewhere in the tetrascape. Plaintive calls for aid came from them at
irregular intervals, piteous half-sane ramblings about ‘impossible spaces’
and ‘spirals of madness’.
From Titus Endor we heard nothing.
The main surface war still raged. Mirepoix commanders reported gains
along the fire lakes that edged the target edifices, one of which was
reportedly beginning to implode as if great harm had been done to it
internally.
In a vault of smooth, polished beige that seemed to us to have no ceiling,
we found our first saruthi. They were dead, a dozen of them, their grey
bulks split and mauled, silver stilts torn off. Through the next gate lay a
spiral room littered with a hundred more. Moving among the grey dead,
their pallid limbs dripping with ichor, were several of the white slave beasts
that had carried the Necroteuch onto the plateau. They seemed to me to
have broken free as many dragged their wire restraints. Some had taken up
silver stilts and were stabbing them slowly and repeatedly into the corpses
of their grey masters.
I wondered if the pitiful white things were a separate race enslaved by the
saruthi, or a bastardised, mutant caste kept in servitude. The invasion, it
seemed, had freed them to turn on their owners and butcher them. Such is
the price of slavery, sooner or later.
The slave-things offered us no threat. They didn’t even appear to notice
the humans moving amongst them. With silent, methodical determination,
they mutilated the bodies of the saruthi.
In another chamber, an oval dish with tessellated tiles and a strangely
warm atmosphere, living saruthi milled aimlessly in their hundreds. Some
had lost stilts and were limping, others lay in trembling masses, their skulls
flopped back on their bodies. The smell of liquorice, or whatever it was,
reeked here. As we watched, white slave-things lumbered into the chamber
through another tetragate and began to twist apart and maul the saruthi, one
by one, with the calm, methodical motions of insects. The saruthi offered no
resistance.
This story was repeated in other chambers and curving halls, saruthi lay
dead or meandering without purpose, freed slaves finding them by touch
and dismembering them.
I wonder, even now, as to the meaning of these alien scenes. Had the
saruthi given up, resigned to their doom, or had some other circumstance
stolen their will to live and resist? Not even the tech-priests or the
xenobiologists could provide an answer. There is, ultimately, only the fact
of their alien nature; abstract, inscrutable and beyond the capacity of the
human mind to fathom.
WHEN WE FOUND the archpriest Dazzo, he was close to death.
A battle of titanic proportions had taken place in the tetrascape where he
lay. Thousands of dead lay on the tiled floor: Mirepoix infantry and heretic
troops alike. Two Children of the Emperor and three Deathwatch were
among the fallen. The tetrascape, by far the largest of any we had seen in
the edifice, reached away beyond the curve of all human dimensions, and
the jumbled corpses covered the endless floor into infinity.
Dazzo lay at the foot of an asymmetrical block that rose from the tiles
like a standing stone. His body was torn by gunshot wounds. Heldane sat
nearby, his back to the great block, guarding the archpriest with an
autopistol. Heldane’s torso was smirched in blood and his breathing was
laboured.
He saw us approach through the tetragate and lowered the gun weakly.
‘What happened here, Heldane?’
‘A battle,’ he said, wheezing. ‘We came upon it as it was raging. When
Inquisitor Endor saw this wretch, he drove us into the fight to reach him. It
was a blur after that.’
‘Where’s Endor?’ I asked, looking around, hoping I would not see his
corpse among the dead.
‘Gone... gone after Locke.’
‘Which way?’
He pointed weakly to a tetragate on the far side of the sea of bodies.
‘Does Locke have the Necroteuch? The saruthi Necroteuch, I mean?’
‘No,’ Heldane said. ‘But he has the primer.’
‘The what?’
‘Dazzo got it out of this thing somehow,’ he said, slapping the stone
block that supported him. ‘A language primer. A translation tool. Without
it, the saruthi version of the text is unreadable to us.’
‘How in the Emperor’s name did he do that?’ Guilar asked.
‘With his mind,’ Heldane said. ‘Can’t you feel that after-burn of the
psychic effort?’
I found that I could. The mental taste of a mind almost burned out. The
raised block was clearly another part of the saruthi’s mysterious technology,
perhaps the equivalent of an Imperial cogitator, perhaps something more
sentient, even something alive. Dazzo, whose psychic abilities I already
knew to be monstrous, had identified it and psychically assaulted it, forcing
it to give up its secrets. An extraordinary feat of the mind, a triumph of will.
‘A polyhedron,’ Heldane added. ‘Irregular, small, made of pearl, it
seemed to me. It just came out of the block into his hands. Materialised. I
saw it happening as I fought my way to them. But the effort destroyed his
mind. Endor cut him down. He hadn’t the strength to resist.’
‘How do you know it was this... primer?’ asked Bequin.
‘I read it in his dying mind. Like I said, there is no resistance left there.
See for yourself.’
I crossed over to Dazzo and knelt next to him. Ragged breathing sucked
in and out of his bloody mouth. I drove my mind into his, pushing aside
pathetic strands of denial, and confirmed Heldane’s story. With inhuman
willpower, Dazzo had wrenched the language primer from the saruthi
technology, and with it the whereabouts of the xenos Necroteuch. Dying, he
had passed both to Locke to finish the task.
‘Gregor!’ Midas hissed. I turned. Far away, across the curve of the
tetrascape, heretic troops were advancing through the dead. They began
firing at us.
Guilar and the Gudrunites fired back, taking what cover they could to
resist.
‘Brother Guilar, I need you to hold these bastards at bay.’
‘Where are you going, inquisitor?’ he asked, sliding a fresh clip into his
storm bolter.
‘After Locke and Endor, to do what I can.’
TWENTY-FIVE
Xenos Necroteuch.
Endgame.
The blank-eyed man.
WE LEFT THE firefight behind us and plunged through the tetragate.
Bequin, Midas and I, racing as fast as we could through the disorienting
spirals and imbricating segments of the dying saruthi edifice.
As we ran, I reported the situation to fleet command, but had no reply or
way of knowing if they’d understood me. Then I tried Titus Endor, but the
vox was dead.
Moving at speed, the place became even more of a four-dimensional
maze, but I had in my mind now the engram I had taken from Dazzo, the
memory trace of the route to the xenos Necroteuch he had ripped from the
block.
By my estimation – and it could hardly be trusted – we were approaching
the heart of the edifice. Perhaps not the physical or geographic heart, but
that part of the dimensional construct buried most deeply in the interlocking
lamina of warped space and time.
There were more saruthi here, skittering and clicking around on their
silver limb-braces without purpose or response. The smell of liquorice filled
the warm, glowing tunnels and tiled chambers.
We heard screaming ahead of us, and the thump of gunfire.
‘Titus? Titus! It’s Eisenhorn! Do you read?’
The vox coughed into life. ‘Gregor! For the love of the Emperor! I need
—’
It broke again. More shots.
We hurried through a tetragate and almost at once had to dive for cover
as las-fire flurried around us. The chamber we had entered was by no means
the largest we had found in the place, but it was singular. Dark, and gloomy,
it lacked the radiance that shone from the walls and floors elsewhere. The
lustrous material that composed the rest of the edifice was here grey and
dissected, as if dead.
Another block, like the one Heldane had been propped up against but
many times the size, rose from the ashy floor, streaked with oily, greenish
matter that ran down its flanks and pooled at the base. An asymmetrical
shelf jutted from it, just above the height of an average human, and a blue
octahedron sat upon it, glowing internally.
The xenos Necroteuch. Dazzo’s engram immediately confirmed it.
The chamber stank with its evil, the liquorice smell, so rich and cloying it
made us gag. Behind and above the main pillar, warped sculptures of metal,
bone and other organic materials grew from the walls and curving roof.
Vicious hooks on filthy chains dangled from these outgrowths. This was not
saruthi handiwork but a touch of pure Chaos, spawned by the Necroteuch,
infecting the xenos fabric of its sanctum.
Smaller pillars, irregular and unmatched, dotted the floor around the
main block. In between them, a gunfight was raging. The three of us ran
from the exposure of the lit tetragate and found shelter behind the nearest of
the smaller blocks. Las-shots wove in and out of the stone shapes,
ricocheting and rebounding.
‘Titus!’
‘Gregor!’ He was twenty metres away, a third of the way into the
chamber, huddled behind a block and firing his laspistol at figures closer to
the Necroteuch’s resting place.
I glimpsed Locke, and eight or nine heretic troopers.
I looked to either side of me at Bequin and Midas. ‘Choose your targets,’
I told them. We began to fire in support of Endor, dropping at least one of
the heretics. As they reeled from the salvo, Endor leapt up and ran forward.
A las-shot clipped him and blew him back against a stone upright.
I ran forward myself, firing my bolt pistol which I had braced in both
hands. I blew chunks from the blocks ahead of me, and hit at least one of
the enemy gunners. I reached Endor.
He was wounded in the chest. It would be fatal if we couldn’t get him
clear quickly. I pulled him into cover, and waited while Bequin ran up
through the rows to my side.
‘Pressure, here!’ I said, showing her, my hands wet with my old friend’s
blood. She did as she was told.
I became aware of thunderous noises from beyond the chamber. The
place shook. More thunder rolled and a section of the curved ceiling
suddenly splintered and collapsed, cascading wreckage down, allowing cold
exterior light to shaft in. A second later, three more holes ruptured and burst
through the roof, and from outside I could hear the muffled hammering of
bombardment.
‘Midas!’
He was already moving up to my left, ditching his needle rifle for the
pistols in the tight confines. Lethal Glavian needles hissed through the air.
The ground continued to shake. A further section of roof came down.
Leaving Endor with Bequin, I ducked from pillar to pillar, braving the
deluge of shots. Midas and I switched to our earpiece links and Glossia.
‘Thorn ushers Aegis, a tempest sinister.’
‘Aegis attending, tempest in three.’
I counted the three beats and ran forward as Midas hurled his frag
grenade to my left before opening fire with both pistols.
The flash and bang of the blast obscured the bombardment outside for a
moment. A heretic was flung upwards, limbs flailing, and glanced brokenly
off a pillar before hitting the ground.
Midas’s ‘tempest’ of covering confusion had allowed me to get within
ten metres of Locke. I could no longer see him, however. Keeping my grip
on my bolt pistol, I drew my power sword in my left hand and came around
the block.
Locke and one of his men had chosen the exact same moment to plough
forward into me. We broke from cover and came face to face in the narrow
gap between pillars. My pistol’s first shot missed the lunging Locke and
tore the left arm off his accomplice. Before the wailing man had even hit
the ground, Locke’s laspistol had put a round through the meat of my right
arm. A long-bladed dagger flashed forward in his other hand. We slammed
into each other. I tried to sweep my power sword around, but it struck
something and Locke side-stepped. The basket hilt of his dagger smashed
into my face and knocked me over onto my back. With a grin that he knew I
could never copy, he raised his laspistol to fire down into my brain.
Two tonnes of xenos-quarried stone pillar, sliced through at hip-height by
my power blade, crushed him into the flaking ground.
I ROSE.
Gorgone Locke was still alive. His belly and pelvis were smashed under
the fallen pillar and his arms were pinned. He gazed up at me through
blinking, bewildered eyes.
‘Gorgone Locke, in the eyes of the Holy Inquisition, you are thrice
damned by action, association and belief,’ I said, beginning the catechism
of abolition.
‘N-no...’ he whispered.
As I completed the exclamation, I cut the mark of heresy into the flesh of
his brow with the tip of my sword. By the time I had finished, he was dead
from his crush injuries.
The shattering chamber still shook. On their long chains, the hooks
swung. Dust and fragments dribbled down from the tears in the roof, falling
through the bars of cold light. I reached down and found the pearl
polyhedron in Locke’s blood-soaked coat. The primer. I slipped it into my
pocket and turned to see Midas approaching.
‘The last of his rats have fled,’ he said, holstering his pistols. He looked
down at the dead ship master. ‘So perish all heretics, eh?’
I reached up with on hand to take the xenos Necroteuch from its shelf –
and found myself unable to move. Some enormous psychic force froze me
rigid.
‘So perish all heretics indeed,’ said a voice. ‘Turn him so he can see me.’
Involuntarily, I swung round, my hand still raised in the act of reaching
out. I saw Midas, also paralysed and rigid, his dark features locked in a
rictus of dismay.
Konrad Molitor, my brother inquisitor, was standing before me, smiling.
His three hooded servants were at his side.
‘Such valour, Gregor. Such dedication. I thought you’d be the one to find
the prize.’
I tried to answer, but my mouth refused to obey me. Spittle bubbled
between my clenched teeth.
Molitor looked around at his cowled companions. ‘Let him speak,’ he
said.
The psychic constraints on my voice slackened. Speech was still an
effort. ‘W-what are you d-doing, Molitor?’
‘Recovering the priceless Necroteuch, of course. We really, really can’t
have you destroying another copy now, can we?’
‘W-we?’
‘There are many who believe mankind will benefit more from the study
of this artefact than from its destruction. I have come to safeguard those
interests.’
‘R-rorken will n-never allow... y-you will b-burn for—’
‘My estimable Lord Brother Rorken will never know. Feel how this place
quakes. See how the roof splinters and collapses? Ten minutes ago, I
signalled to the fleet that the primary objective was achieved. I gave the
code for Sanction Extremis. They believe the Necroteuch had been found
and safely disposed of. Our forces are withdrawing, with all haste. The
batteries of the fleet have begun to level these xenos places. No one will
know that the divine Necroteuch has been carried off safely. Not a shred of
evidence will survive the bombardment. Not a shred of evidence... nor any
voice of dissent.’
His yellow-pupilled eyes regarded me. ‘How brave of you to give your
life in the assault on 56-Izar. Your name will be remembered on the roll of
honour. I assure you, I’ll see to that myself.’
‘B-b-b-bastard...’ I fought with my mind to break free, but it was
impossible. This was not Molitor’s hold on me. One of his retainers, or all
three in concert, supremely powerful.
‘Fetch it for me,’ Molitor said to one of his men, gesturing to the
Necroteuch with a wave of his checked sleeve. ‘We would be well to leave
promptly.’
The hammering bombardment was now a perpetual shaking roar. The
robed figure slid forward and took down the blue octahedron, cupping it in
elegant, long-nailed fingers. He seemed to study it, and looked round at
Molitor.
‘It is useless,’ he said.
‘What?’
‘Unreadable. Locked within an impenetrable xenos language code.’
Molitor stammered. ‘No! Impossible! Break the code!’
‘Would that I could. It is beyond even my ability.’
‘There must be a means of translation!’
The hooded man holding the Necroteuch looked round at me.
‘He has a primer. The only primer. He’s trying not to think about it, but I
can see it in his mind. Look in his coat pocket.’
The smile returned to Molitor’s face. He came close to me, reaching out a
hand towards my coat. ‘Devious to the last, Gregor. You whoreson wretch.’
A las-round blew his hand off at the wrist.
Molitor screamed and stumbled back, clutching his smoking stump.
Bequin, her face pursed grimly, her las-carbine at her shoulder and aimed
at his heart, appeared beside me.
‘Kill them! Kill them!’ Molitor screamed. I felt the immediate pressure
of the psychic vice tightening to finish me. Then I reeled away, freed. The
psychic blank of Bequin’s untouchable nature shielded me now she was at
my side. The servant holding the Necroteuch took a step backwards in
surprise.
Molitor, frantic with pain and anger, saw that his powerful psychic was
thwarted somehow and yelled ‘Albaara! T’harth!’
Code words. Trigger words. The pair of servants who had remained by
his side sprang forward, their robes shredding away.
Arco-flagellants. Heretics reprogrammed and rebuilt with augmetics and
bionics to serve as murderous slaves. The trigger words woke them from
their calming states of bliss and plunged them into maniacal rages.
Out of their robes, they were foul, hunched things, encrusted with crude
surgical implants and sacred charms. Their hands were lashing clutches of
electrowhips, their eyes dull, bulbous orbits under the rims of the tarnished
pacifier helmets bolted to their skulls.
Midas, Bequin and I fired our weapons together, raking them with
punishment as they charged forward. The damage they suffered was
immense, but still they came on, their bodies pumped with intoxicating
adrenal fluid, pain-blockers and frenzy-inducing chemical stimulants. They
didn’t feel what we were doing to them.
One was just an arm’s length from me when my desperate rain of bolts
finally defeated it. A shot exploded the armoured matrix of chemical
dispensers on its shoulder, spraying fluid into the air. In a second, it fell
convulsing to the ground at our feet as the damage robbed it of its drug-
source and left nothing but agony behind.
The other barely felt the punctures of Midas’s too subtle needles.
Frantically, we split to either side, out of its path. Braying and thrashing its
whip-limbs, it pounded after Midas, who ducked left and right between
pillars, trying to evade it. Only his Glavian-bred grace and speed kept him
out of its inexorably advancing grip.
He knew he had seconds left. Bequin and I were moving, but there was
precious little we could do.
Midas pulled off his pouch of grenades, priming one as he twisted and
side-stepped between the pillars, scarcely avoiding a withering lash of
flexible metal whips that scored gouges in the stone.
Midas feinted left and then threw himself directly at the beast, snagging
the strap of his pouch around its neck as he vaulted over its shoulder head
first.
The grenades detonated in one stunning flash and atomised the ravening
man-beast. Caught in the shockwave, Midas was thrown into a pillar and
dropped unconscious.
‘Eisenhorn! Eisenhorn!’ Molitor was wailing as he and his remaining
servant hunted for me. His voice was cracking with pain and fury.
‘Stay at my side,’ I told Bequin as we ran deeper into the chamber. ‘That
psychic can’t touch me while I’m close to you.’
Half the ceiling and a significant part of the wall blew in. For a second
the air was solid with billowing orange fire.
Deafened, our skins scorched by the blast, Bequin and I were back on our
feet in a moment. The chamber was open to the sky now, and cold white
light poured in, heavy with smoke.
‘Come on!’ Together we scrambled towards the blast-damaged wall,
picking our way up the smouldering slope of broken stone and whatever
material the saruthi used for construction. This material was fused and
bubbling, like plastic or flesh.
We headed for the light.
WE EMERGED HIGH on the curving upper face of the saruthi edifice. It was
cold, and the wind that came across the segmented ridges of the polished
white roof was brisk and full of the odours of smoke, fyceline and
promethium.
We were at a dizzying height. The pearly flanks of the vast structure
arced away to a ground far below and the surface was hard and polished
like ice. Bequin slipped, and I managed to grab her before she slid away
down the curve.
From up here, high in the alien sky, we could see across the lakes of fire
and the vast smoke banks that rolled away for hundreds of kilometres. We
could see flocks of troopships soaring up and away through the smoke
cover towards the parent ships in orbit. On the flats of white mud far
beneath us, Imperial troops ran to waiting dropships, discarding packs and
helmets and even weapons in their haste to leave. Tanks and armoured
carriers wallowed and puffed through the wet mud and up onto the tongue-
like ramps of heavy lifters. Shells and las-fire flickered across the lakes and
mud as the remaining heretic forces fought on heedless.
Lances and forks of dazzling energy bit down from the clouds, murdering
the landscape. Obeying Molitor’s instructions to the letter, Admiral Spatian
was levelling the area. All five of us inquisitors, along with Cynewolf and
key Deathwatchers and selected officers of the invasion force, had been
given the code words to unleash this doom. Molitor had sealed our fate.
Once given, Sanction Extremis could not be revoked, even if my vox had
been working instead of crippled by the electromagnetic bursts that
accompanied every orbital strike. As per the battle plans, Spatian was
systematically wasting the invasion site as fast as possible, even at the cost
of his own retreating ground forces.
Another saruthi edifice, twenty kilometres away, died. Shaped in a form
that suggested a nautilus shell, its opalescent curves were cracked and split
by blue-hot heavy lasers. The die-straight beams came down through the
clouds from ships so far up they were invisible, and tore through the edifice
like testamental judgment. Waves of fighter-bombers swept in, sowing
payloads of munitions that bloomed in rippling seas of explosions. Guided
warheads, sleek like airborne sharks, whined overhead on the last stage of
their first and final journey from starship to target.
The edifice ruptured and blew out. Light-shock lit the hemisphere. A
towering column of white ash-smoke rose, folding into a fifteen-kilometre
torus-shaped cloud.
The sight was stunning, shocking. Bequin and I gazed at it. A few
heartbeats later it was repeated behind us, forty kilometres distant, as
another saruthi edifice was annihilated.
The edifice on whose smoothly curving upper surfaces we now stood was
undoubtedly going to go the same way soon. Even now, I knew, the co-
ordinates were being loaded into the fleet’s gunnery servitors.
We ran along the lip of another curved segment. Afterburners red against
the black smoke, more dropships came in, heading towards cheering,
gesticulating huddles of Mirepoix infantry out on the flats. I was astounded
at the selfless courage of the dropship crews. Spatian’s bombardment
wasn’t waiting for them to move in and pull out. They were risking
everything to make the surface run and retrieve as many troopers as they
could.
‘Gregor!’ Bequin shouted in my ear.
I turned. Down the shell-form span of the roof behind us, Molitor and his
henchman had appeared out of the blast hole. Unsteady, they scrambled up
after us.
A las-shot whined past me, kissing the pearly surface and leaving a burn-
scar.
‘The primer, you whoreson bastard! Give me the primer!’ Molitor yelled.
I gave him a full clip of bolt rounds instead.
The first of the thundering tracer shots splintered chunks out of the
edifice roof. Then I hit and exploded his left thigh, his belly and his throat.
Konrad Molitor bucked and twitched as the rounds tore through him, and
then fell. His mauled body slid down the curve of the roof and disappeared,
leaving a smear of blood behind it.
His henchman advanced, heedless of the shots, throwing off his hooded
robe.
He was naked beneath it. Tall, well muscled, with a golden cast to his
skin. His face was handsome and tiny residual horns sprouted from his
skull.
His eyes were blank.
My prophetic dreams were made flesh.
Terror seized me, turned my heart inside out.
TWENTY-SIX
Cherubael.
The brink.
Exterminatus.
THE BLANK-EYED MAN – though in truth he was not a man, but a daemon
in human form – strode up the shining curve towards me. The glowing
octahedron of the saruthi’s unholy text was clasped in one nimble hand.
‘I would like the primer now please, Gregor.’
‘What are you?’
‘This is no place for introductions,’ He gestured about himself. Lances of
annihilation blasted down into the mud-flats nearby.
‘Humour me...’ I managed.
‘Very well. My name is Cherubael. Now, that primer. Time is ticking
away.’
‘Time will always tick away,’ I said. ‘Who made you?’
‘Made me?’ The blank-eyed man smiled at me duplicitously.
‘You’re... a daemonhost. A conjured thing. Tell me who made you and
who commanded you and Molitor to come after this prize... and I might
give you the primer.’
He laughed and licked his thin lips with a glossy forked tongue.
‘Let us both be abundantly clear about this, Gregor. You will give me the
primer. Either you will hand me the primer now, or I will come over to you
and take it. And break every bone in your body. And rape that girl at your
side. And break every bone in her body too. And then drag your jiggling
carcasses down into the chamber below and string you both up on the
hooks, and burn out your agony centres as I wait for the bombardment to
flatten this place.’
He paused.
‘Your choice.’
‘You’ve been in my dreams for a long while now. Why is that?’ I
pressed.
‘You are gifted, Gregor. And time is not the arrow that humans like to
think it is. A second in the warp would show you that. Why, a second in the
four-dimensional habitats of the saruthi should have proved it too. Your
dreams were just nightmares of something yet to happen.’
‘Who made you?’ My voice was insistent. His answer was the one I least
expected, and it left me all but stunned.
‘The Holy Inquisition made me, Gregor. A brother of yours made me.
Now, for the last time, give me that—’
The daemonhost swung around suddenly as voices called out from lower
down the roof. Brother-Captain Cynewolf was clambering up out of the
blast hole, flanked by Midas and another Deathwatcher carrying the limp
form of Titus Endor.
Cynewolf raised his storm bolter and fired at the blank-eyed man.
Cherubael reached out and caught the glowing shells, plucking them out
of the air.
‘Go home, Astartes bastard!’ he yelled down the sloping roof at
Cynewolf. ‘This has nothing to do with you!’
The fiend came up the ridge until he was facing me. I could see the tiny
arcs of power darting across his glowing skin. I could smell the stink of
corruption.
Eye to eye now.
He held out his hand, palm up, fingernails long and polished like claws.
‘Clever of you to find an untouchable to cancel me out,’ He looked over
at Bequin. ‘How did you manage that?’
‘Fate, like time, is not linear, Cherubael. Surely you know that. I found
Bequin in the same way that the dreams of you found me.’
He nodded. ‘I like you, Gregor Eisenhorn. So very challenging and
stimulating – for a human. I wish we had leisure to discourse and break
bread... But we haven’t!’ he snapped suddenly. ‘Give me the primer!’
I took out the polyhedron. His smile broadened.
I dropped the artefact onto the silky roof and, before it could slide away,
crushed it under the heel of my boot.
The daemonhost took a step backwards, gazing down at the crunched
dust.
He looked up at me again with his blank eyes. ‘You are a man of singular
dedication, Gregor. I would have enjoyed killing you, when the day and
hour came. But you’re dead already. This edifice is two hundred and forty
seconds away from destruction. Cherish this—’
He tossed me the xenos Necroteuch and I caught it in one gloved hand.
‘You’ve won. Take that consolation to the afterlife.’
He started to run, towards the lip of the roof, and then threw himself out
in a perfect dive, arms raised. For a moment, he hung in space, then he
forked his body in, executed a precise roll and disappeared into the lake of
fire below.
I pulled Bequin to me as Cynewolf, Midas and the other Deathwatch
Marine approached. Endor, crumpled in the Astartes’s arms, looked dead. I
prayed he was, for in a moment this place would dissolve in fire.
‘Rosethorn from Aegis, above and... well, above, for Emperor’s sake!
Damn this Glossia crap! Move!’
My gun-cutter swung in over the edifice roof, ramp-jaws open. I could
see Fischig at the helm through the cockpit screens, yelling at me. Aemos
was at his side.
I WATCHED 56-IZAR die from the bridge of the Saint Scythus as we left
orbit. Petals of flame, the size of continents, spread out under its milky skin.
Sanction Extremis. Exterminatus.
After the deluge of fire, the virus bombs. The seething storms of tailored
plagues. The nuclear atrocity.
It was a cinder by the time we left. No contact with the saruthi race was
ever made again.
And the tainted, glowing light of the Necroteuch was extinguished
forever.
EPILOGUE
At Pamophrey.
At Pamophrey, we rested.
FORTY WEEKS OF voyage through the immaterium had dulled our sense of
victory. The fleet dispersed at Thracian Primaris and the last I saw of
Sergeant Jeruss was a waving hand across a smoky, beery bar.
I rented a villa out by the Sound at Pamophrey. Midas slept most of the
day, and whiled away the night in games of regicide with Aemos and
Fischig. Bequin bathed in the sun, and swam in the breakers.
I sat out on the salt-whipped stoop and watched over the beach like a god
who has forgotten his creations.
Great labours still awaited us. Reports to be made, interviews and
debriefings to be attended. Lord Rorken had called for a tribunal of enquiry,
and the High Lords of Terra were awaiting a full account of the matter.
Months of paperwork, hearings and evidential audits lay ahead. The identity
of the force behind Molitor and his daemonhost remained a mystery, and
though Lord Rorken was as anxious as myself to find an answer, I doubted
any would readily emerge. The question might fester and stagnate,
unanswered, in the slow, unwieldy bureaucracy of the Inquisition for years.
I would not allow that. As soon as I was free to engage upon another
case, I would dedicate myself to finding Cherubael’s master. The beloved
rule of man had come close to great calamity thanks to his scheming.
I would not forget the saruthi. They were an object lesson – if any were
truly needed – of how an entire, advanced culture might be consumed by
Chaos.
SEABIRDS LOOPED IN the gusting tide wind. The breakers crashed. The
blank-eyed man still haunted my dreams. After-echoes or ripples of the
future? I would have to wait and see.
MISSING IN ACTION
I LOST MY left hand on Sameter. This is how it occurred. On the thirteenth
day of Sagittar (local calendar), three days before the solstice, in the mid-
rise district of the city of Urbitane, an itinerant evangelist called Lazlo
Mombril was found shuffling aimlessly around the flat roof of a disused
tannery lacking his eyes, his tongue, his nose and both of his hands.
Urbitane is the second city of Sameter, a declining agro-chemical planet
in the Helican subsector, and it is no stranger to crimes of cruelty and spite
brought on by the vicissitudes of neglect and social deprivation afflicting its
tightly packed population. But this act of barbarity stood out for two
reasons. First, it was no hot-blooded assault or alcohol-fuelled manslaughter
but a deliberate and systematic act of brutal, almost ritual mutilation.
Second, it was the fourth such crime discovered that month.
I had been on Sameter for just three weeks, investigating the links
between a bonded trade federation and a secessionist movement on
Hesperus at the request of Lord Inquisitor Rorken. The links proved to be
nothing – Urbitane’s economic slough had forced the federation to chase
unwise business with unscrupulous ship masters, and the real meat of the
case lay on Hesperus – but I believe this was the Lord Inquisitor’s way of
gently easing me back into active duties following the long and arduous
affair of the Necroteuch.
By the Imperial calendar it was 241.M41, late in that year. I had just
finished several self-imposed months of recuperation, meditation and study
on Thracian Primaris. The eyes of the daemonhost Cherubael still woke me
some nights, and I wore permanent scars from torture at the hands of the
sadist Gorgone Locke. His strousine neural scourge had damaged my
nervous system and paralysed my face. I would not smile again for the rest
of my life. But the battle wounds sustained on KCX-1288 and 56-Izar had
healed, and I was now itching to renew my work.
This idle task on Sameter had suited me, so I had taken it and closed the
dossier after a swift and efficient investigation. But latterly, as I prepared to
leave, officials of the Munitorium unexpectedly requested an audience.
I was staying with my associates in a suite of rooms in the Urbitane
Excelsior, a shabby but well-appointed establishment in the high-rise
district of the city. Through soot-stained, armoured roundels of glass twenty
metres across, the suite looked out across the filthy grey towers of the city
to the brackish waters of the polluted bay twenty kilometres away.
Ornithopters and biplanes buzzed between the massive city structures, and
the running lights of freighters and orbitals glowed in the smog as they
swung down towards the landing port. Out on the isthmus, through a haze
of yellow, stagnant air, promethium refineries belched brown smoke into
the perpetual twilight.
‘They’re here,’ said Bequin, entering the suite’s lounge from the outer
lobby. She had dressed in a demure gown of blue damask and a silk pash-
meena, perfectly in keeping with my instruction that we should present a
muted but powerful image.
I myself was clad in a suit of soft black linen with a waistcoat of grey
velvet and a hip length black leather storm-coat.
‘Do you need me for this?’ asked Midas Betancore, my pilot and
confidant.
I shook my head. ‘I don’t intend to be delayed here. I just have to be
polite. Go on to the landing port and make sure the gun-cutter’s readied for
departure.’
He nodded and left. Bequin showed the visitors in.
I had felt it necessary to be polite because Eskeen Hansaard, Urbitane’s
Minister of Security, had come to see me himself. He was a massive man in
a double-breasted brown tunic, his big frame offset oddly by his finely
featured, boyish face. He was escorted by two bodyguards in grey, armour-
ribbed uniforms and a short but handsome, black-haired woman in a dark
blue bodyglove.
I had made sure I was sitting in an armchair when Bequin showed them
in so I could rise in a measured, respectful way. I wanted them to be in no
doubt who was really in charge here.
‘Minister Hansaard,’ I said, shaking his hand. ‘I am Inquisitor Gregor
Eisenhorn of the Ordo Xenos. These are my associates Alizabeth Bequin,
Arbites Chastener Godwyn Fischig and savant Uber Aemos. How may I
help you?’
‘I have no wish to waste your time, inquisitor,’ he said, apparently
nervous in my presence. That was good, just as I had intended it. ‘A case
has been brought to my attention that I believe is beyond the immediate
purview of the city arbites. Frankly, it smacks of warp-corruption, and cries
out for the attention of the Inquisition.’
He was direct. That impressed me. A ranking official of the Imperium,
anxious to be seen to be doing the right thing. Nevertheless, I still expected
his business might be a mere nothing, like the affair of the trade federation,
a local crime requiring only my nod of approval that it was fine for him to
continue and close. Men like Hansaard are often over-careful, in my
experience.
‘There have been four deaths in the city during the last month that we
believe to be linked. I would appreciate your advice on them. They are
connected by merit of the ritual mutilation involved.’
‘Show me,’ I said.
‘Captain?’ he responded.
Arbites Captain Hurlie Wrex was the handsome woman with the short
black hair. She stepped forward, nodded respectfully, and gave me a data-
slate with the gold crest of the Adeptus Arbites on it.
‘I have prepared a digested summary of the facts,’ she said.
I began to speed-read the slate, already preparing the gentle knock-back I
was expecting to give to his case. Then I stopped, slowed, read back.
I felt a curious mix of elation and frustration. Even from this cursorial
glance, there was no doubt this case required the immediate attention of the
Imperial Inquisition. I could feel my instincts stiffen and my appetites
whetten, for the first time in months. In bothering me with this, Minister
Hansaard was not being over careful at all. At the same time, my heart sank
with the realisation that my departure from this miserable city would be
delayed.
ALL FOUR VICTIMS had been blinded and had their noses, tongues and
hands removed. At the very least.
The evangelist, Mombril, had been the only one found alive. He had died
from his injuries eight minutes after arriving at Urbitane Mid-rise Sector
Infirmary. It seemed to me likely that he had escaped his ritual tormentors
somehow before they could finish their work.
The other three were a different story.
Poul Grevan, a machinesmith; Luthar Hewall, a rug-maker; Idilane
Fasple, a mid-wife.
Hewall had been found a week before by city sanitation servitors during
routine maintenance to a soil stack in the mid-rise district. Someone had
attempted to burn his remains and then flush them into the city’s ancient
waste system, but the human body is remarkably durable. The post could
not prove his missing body parts had not simply succumbed to decay and
been flushed away, but the damage to the ends of the forearm bones seemed
to speak convincingly of a saw or chain-blade.
When Idilane Fasple’s body was recovered from a crawlspace under the
roof of a mid-rise tenement hab, it threw more light on the extent of
Hewall’s injuries. Not only had Fasple been mutilated in the manner of the
evangelist Mombril, but her brain, brainstem and heart had been excised.
The injuries were hideous. One of the roof workers who discovered her had
subsequently committed suicide. Her bloodless, almost dessicated body,
dried out – smoked, if you will – by the tenement’s heating vents, had been
wrapped in a dark green cloth similar to the material of an Imperial Guard-
issue bedroll and stapled to the underside of the rafters with an industrial
nail gun.
Cross-reference between her and Hewall convinced the arbites that the
rug-maker had very probably suffered the removal of his brain stem and
heart too. Until that point, they had ascribed the identifiable lack of those
soft organs to the almost toxic levels of organic decay in the liquescent filth
of the soil stack.
Graven, actually the first victim found, had been dredged from the waters
of the bay by salvage ship. He had been presumed to be a suicide
dismembered by the screws of a passing boat until Wrex’s careful
crosschecking had flagged up too many points of similarity.
Because of the peculiar circumstances of their various post mortem
locations, it was pathologically impossible to determine any exact date or
time of death. But Wrex could be certain of a window. Graven had been last
seen on the nineteenth of Aquiarae, three days before his body had been
dredged up. Hewall had delivered a finished rug to a high-rise customer on
the twenty-fourth, and had dined that same evening with friends at a
charcute in mid-rise. Fasple had failed to report for work on the fifth of
Sagittar, although the night before she had seemed happy and looking
forward to her next shift, according to friends.
‘I thought at first we might have a serial predator loose in mid-rise,’ said
Wrex. ‘But the pattern of mutilation seems to me more extreme than that.
This is not feral murder, or even psychopathic, post-slaying depravity. This
is specific, purposeful ritual.’
‘How do you arrive at that?’ asked my colleague, Fischig. Fischig was a
senior arbites from Hubris, with plenty of experience in murder cases.
Indeed, it was his fluency with procedure and familiarity with modus
operandi that had convinced me to make him a part of my band. That, and
his ferocious strength in a fight.
Wrex looked sidelong at him, as if he was questioning her ability.
‘Because of the nature of the dismemberment. Because of the way the
remains were disposed of.’ She looked at me. ‘In my experience, inquisitor,
a serial killer secretly wants to be found, and certainly wants to be known.
It will display its kills with wanton openness, declaring its power over the
community. It thrives on the terror and fear it generates. Great efforts were
made to hide these bodies. That suggest to me the killer was far more
interested in the deaths themselves than in the reaction to the deaths.’
‘Well put, captain,’ I said. ‘That has been my experience too. Cult
killings are often hidden so that the cult can continue its work without fear
of discovery.’
‘Suggesting that there are other victims still to find...’ said Bequin
casually, a chilling prophecy as it now seems to me.
‘Cult killings?’ said the minister. ‘I brought this to your attention because
I feared as much, but do you really think—’
‘On Alphex, the warp-cult removed their victims’ hands and tongues
because they were organs of communication,’ Aemos began. ‘On Brettaria,
the brains were scooped out in order for the cult to ingest the spiritual
matter – the anima, as you might say – of their prey. A number of other
worlds have suffered cult predations where the eyes have been forfeit...
Gulinglas, Pentari, Hesperus, Messina... windows of the soul, you see. The
Heretics of Saint Scarif, in fact, severed their ritual victims’ hands and then
made them write out their last confessions using ink quills rammed into the
stumps of—’
‘Enough information, Aemos,’ I said. The minister was looking pale.
‘These are clearly cult killings, sir,’ I said. There is a noxious cell of
Chaos at liberty in your city. And I will find it.’
I WENT AT once to the mid-rise district. Grevan, Hewall and Fasple had all
been residents of that part of Urbitane, and Mombril, though a visitor to the
metropolis, had been found there too. Aemos went to the Munitorium
records spire in high-rise to search the local archives. I was particularly
interested in historical cult activity on Sameter, and on date significance.
Fischig, Bequin and Wrex accompanied me.
The genius loci of a place can often say much about the crimes
committed therein. So far, my stay on Sameter had only introduced me to
the cleaner, high-altitude regions of Urbitane’s high-rise, up above the
smog-cover.
Mid-rise was a dismal, wretched place of neglect and poverty. A tarry
resin of pollution coated every surface, and acid rain poured down
unremittingly. Raw-engined traffic crawled nose to tail down the poorly lit
streets, and the very stone of the buildings seemed to be rotting. The
smoggy darkness of mid-rise had a red, firelit quality, the backwash of the
flares from giant gas processors. It reminded me of picture-slate engravings
of the Inferno.
We stepped from Wrex’s armoured speeder at the corner of Shearing
Street and Pentecost. The captain pulled on her arbites helmet and a quilted
flak-coat. I began to wish for a hat of my own, or a rebreather mask. The
rain stank like urine. Every thirty seconds or so an express flashed past on
the elevated trackway, shaking the street.
‘In here,’ Wrex called, and led us through a shutter off the thoroughfare
into the dank hallway of a tenement hab. Everything was stained with
centuries of grime. The heating had been set too high, perhaps to combat
the murky wetness outside, but the result was simply an overwhelming
humidity and a smell like the fur of a mangy canine.
This was Idilane Fasple’s last resting place. She’d been found in the roof.
‘Where did she live?’ asked Fischig.
‘Two streets away. She had a parlour on one of the old court-habs.’
‘Hewall?’
‘His hab about a kilometre west. His remains were found five blocks
east.’
I looked at the data-slate. The tannery where Mombril had been found
was less than thirty minutes’ walk from here, and Graven’s home a short
tram ride. The only thing that broke the geographical focus of these lives
and deaths was the fact that Graven had been dumped in the bay.
‘It hasn’t escaped my notice that they all inhabited a remarkably specific
area,’ Wrex smiled.
‘I never thought it had. But “remarkably” is the word. It isn’t just the
same quarter or district. It’s a intensely close network of streets, a
neighbourhood.’
‘Suggesting?’ asked Bequin.
‘The killer or killers are local too,’ said Fischig.
‘Or someone from elsewhere has a particular hatred of this
neighbourhood and comes into it to do his or her killing,’ said Wrex.
‘Like a hunting ground?’ noted Fischig.
I nodded. Both possibilities had merit.
‘Look around,’ I told Fischig and Bequin, well aware that Wrex’s officers
had already been all over the building. But she said nothing. Our expert
appraisal might turn up something different.
I found a small office at the end of the entrance hall. It was clearly the
cubbyhole of the habitat’s superintendent. Sheaves of paper were pinned to
the flak-board wall: rental dockets, maintenances rosters, notes of resident
complaints. There was a box-tray of lost property, a partially disassembled
mini-servitor in a tub of oil, a stale stink of cheap liquor. A faded ribbon
and paper rosette from an Imperial shrine was pinned over the door with a
regimental rank stud.
‘What you doing in here?’
I looked round. The superintendent was a middle-aged man in a dirty
overall suit. Details. I always look for details. The gold signet ring with the
wheatear symbol. The row of permanent metal sutures closing the scar on
his scalp where the hair had never grown back. The prematurely weathered
skin. The guarded look in his eyes.
I told him who I was and he didn’t seem impressed. Then I asked him
who he was and he said ‘The super. What you doing in here?’
I use my will sparingly. The psychic gift sometimes closes as many doors
as it opens. But there was something about this man. He needed a jolt.
‘What is your name?’ I asked, modulating my voice to carry the full weight
of the psychic probe.
He rocked backwards, and his pupils dilated in surprise.
‘Quater Traves,’ he mumbled.
‘Did you know the midwife Fasple?’
‘I sin her around.’
‘To speak to?’
He shook his head. His eyes never left mine.
‘Did she have friends?’
He shrugged.
‘What about strangers? Anyone been hanging around the hab?’
His eyes narrowed. A sullen, mocking look, as if I hadn’t seen the streets
outside.
‘Who has access to the roofspace where her body was found?’
‘Ain’t nobody bin up there. Not since the place bin built. Then the
heating packs in and the contractors has to break through the roof to get up
there. They found her.’
‘There isn’t a hatch?’
‘Shutter. Locked, and no one has a key. Easier to go through the
plasterboard.’
Outside, we sheltered from the rain under the elevated railway.
‘That’s what Traves told me too,’ Wrex confirmed. ‘No one had been into
the roof for years until the contractors broke their way in.’
‘Someone had. Someone with the keys to the shutter. The killer.’
The soil stack where Hewall had been found was behind a row of
commercial properties built into an ancient skin of scaffolding that cased
the outside of a toolfitters’ workshop like a cobweb. There was what
seemed to be a bar two stages up, where a neon signed flicked between an
Imperial aquila and a fleur-de-lys. Fischig and Wrex continued up to the
next scaffolding level to peer in through the stained windows of the habs
there. Bequin and I went into the bar.
The light was grey inside. At a high bar, four or five drinkers sat on
ratchet-stools and ignored us. The scent of obscura smoke was in the air.
There was a woman behind the counter who took exception to us from
the moment we came in. She was in her forties, with a powerful, almost
masculine build. Her vest was cut off at the armpits and her arms were as
muscular as Fischig’s. There was the small tattoo of a skull and crossbones
on her bicep. The skin of her face was weathered and coarse.
‘Help you?’ she asked, wiping the counter with a glass-cloth. As she did
so I saw that her right arm, from the elbow down, was a prosthetic.
‘Information,’ I said.
She flicked her cloth at the row of bottles on the shelves behind her.
‘Not a brand I know.’
‘You know a man called Hewall?’
‘No.’
‘The guy they found in the waste pipes behind here.’
‘Oh. Didn’t know he had a name.’
Now I was closer I could see the tattoo on her arm wasn’t a skull and
crossbones. It was a wheatear.
‘We all have names. What’s yours?’
‘Omin Lund.’
‘You live around here?’
‘Live is too strong a word.’ She turned away to serve someone else.
‘Scary bitch,’ said Bequin as we went outside. ‘Everyone acts like
they’ve got something to hide.’
‘Everyone does, even if it’s simply how much they hate this town.’
The heart had gone out of Urbitane, out of Sameter itself, about seventy
years before. The mill-hives of Thracian Primaris eclipsed Sameter’s
production, and export profits fell away. In an effort to compete, the
authorities freed the refineries to escalate production by stripping away the
legal restrictions on atmospheric pollution levels. For hundreds of years,
Urbitane had had problems controlling its smog and air-pollutants. For the
last few decades, it hadn’t bothered any more.
My vox-earplug chimed. It was Aemos.
‘What have you found?’
‘It’s most perturbatory. Sameter has been clear of taint for a goodly
while. The last Inquisitorial investigation was thirty-one years ago standard,
and that wasn’t here in Urbitane but in Aquitane, the capital. A rogue
psyker. The planet has its fair share of criminal activity, usually narcotics
trafficking and the consequential mob-fighting. But nothing really markedly
heretical.’
‘Nothing with similarities to the ritual methods?’
‘No, and I’ve gone back two centuries.’
‘What about the dates?’
‘Sagittar thirteenth is just shy of the solstice, but I can’t make any
meaning out of that. The Purge of the Sarpetal Hives is usually
commemorated by upswings of cult activity in the subsector, but that’s six
weeks away. The only other thing I can find is that this Sagittar fifth was
the twenty-first anniversary of the Battle of Klodeshi Heights.’
‘I don’t know it.’
‘The sixth of seven full-scale engagements during the sixteen month
Imperial campaign on Surealis Six.’
‘Surealis... that’s in the next damn subsector! Aemos, every day of the
year is the anniversary of an Imperial action somewhere. What connection
are you making?’
‘The Ninth Sameter Infantry saw service in the war on Surealis.’
Fischig and Wrex had rejoined us from their prowl around the upper
stages of the scaffolding. Wrex was talking on her own vox-set.
She signed off and looked at me, rain drizzling off her visor.
‘They’ve found another one, inquisitor,’ she said.
IT WASN’T ONE. It was three, and their discovery threw the affair wide
open. An old warehouse in the mill zone, ten streets away from Fasple’s
hab, had been damaged by fire two months before, and now the municipal
work-crews had moved in to tear it down and reuse the lot as a site for
cheap, prefab habitat blocks. They’d found the bodies behind the wall
insulation in a mouldering section untouched by the fire. A woman and two
men, systematically mutilated in the manner of the other victims.
But these were much older. I could tell that even at a glance.
I crunched across the debris littering the floorspace of the warehouse
shell. Rain streamed in through the roof holes, illuminated as a blizzard of
white specks by the cold blue beams of the arbites’ floodlights shining into
the place.
Arbites officers were all around, but they hadn’t touched the discovery
itself.
Mummified and shriveled, these foetally curled, pitiful husks had been in
the wall a long time.
‘What’s that?’ I asked.
Fischig leaned forward for a closer look. ‘Adhesive tape, wrapped around
them to hold them against the partition. Old. The gum’s decayed.’
‘That pattern on it. The silver flecks.’
‘I think it’s military issue stuff. Matt-silver coating, you know the sort?
The coating’s coming off with age.’
‘These bodies are different ages,’ I said.
‘I thought so too,’ said Fischig.
WE HAD TO wait six hours for a preliminary report from the district
Examiner Medicae, but it confirmed our guess. All three bodies had been in
the wall for at least eight years, and then for different lengths of time.
Decompositional anomalies showed that one of the males had been in
position for as much as twelve years, the other two added subsequently, at
different occasions. No identifications had yet been made. ‘The warehouse
was last used six years ago,’ Wrex told me. ‘I want a roster of workers
employed there before it went out of business.’ Someone using the same
M.O. and the same spools of adhesive tape had hidden bodies there over a
period of years.
THE DISUSED TANNERY where poor Mombril had been found stood at the
junction between Xerxes Street and a row of slum tenements known as the
Pilings. It was a fetid place, with the stink of the lye and coroscutum used in
the tanning process still pungent in the air. No amount of acid rain could
wash that smell out.
There were no stairs. Fischig, Bequin and I climbed up to the roof via a
metal fire-ladder.
‘How long does a man survive mutilated like that?’
‘From the severed wrists alone, he’d bleed out in twenty minutes,
perhaps,’ Fischig estimated. ‘Clearly, if he had made an escape, he’d have
the adrenalin of terror sustaining him a little.’
‘So when he was found up here, he can have been no more than twenty
minutes from the scene of his brutalisation.’
We looked around. The wretched city looked back at us, close packed
and dense. There were hundreds of possibilities. It might take days to
search them all.
But we could narrow it down. ‘How did he get on the roof?’ I asked.
‘I was wondering that,’ said Fischig.
‘The ladder we came up by..,’ Bequin trailed off as she realised her gaffe.
‘Without hands?’ Fischig smirked.
‘Or sight,’ I finished. ‘Perhaps he didn’t escape. Perhaps his abusers put
him here.’
‘Or perhaps he fell,’ Bequin said, pointing.
The back of a tall warehouse over-shadowed the tannery to the east. Ten
metres up there were shattered windows.
‘If he was in there somewhere, fled blindly, and fell through onto this
roof...’
‘Well reasoned, Alizabeth,’ I said.
The arbites had done decent work, but not even Wrex had thought to
consider this inconsistency.
We went round to the side entrance of the warehouse. The battered metal
shutters were locked. A notice pasted to the wall told would-be intruders to
stay out of the property of Hundlemas Agricultural Stowage.
I took out my multi-key and disengaged the padlock. I saw Fischig had
drawn his sidearm.
‘What’s the matter?’
‘I had a feeling just then... like we were being watched.’
We went inside. The air was cold and still and smelled of chemicals.
Rows of storage vats filled with chemical fertilisers lined the echoing
warehall.
The second floor was bare-boarded and hadn’t been used in years.
Wiremesh had been stapled over a doorway to the next floor, and rainwater
dripped down. Fischig pulled at the mesh. It was cosmetic only, and folded
aside neatly.
Now I drew my autopistol too.
On the street side of the third floor, which was divided into smaller
rooms, we found a chamber ten metres by ten, on the floor of which was
spread a sheet of plastic smeared with old blood and other organic deposits.
There was a stink of fear.
‘This is where they did him,’ Fischig said with certainty.
‘No sign of cult markings or Chaos symbology,’ I mused.
‘Maybe not,’ said Bequin, crossing the room, being careful not to step on
the smeared plastic sheet. For the sake of her shoes, not the crime scene, I
was sure. ‘What’s this? Something was hung here.’
Two rusty hooks in the wall, scraped enough to show something had been
hanging there recently. On the floor below was a curious cross drawn in
yellow chalk.
‘I’ve seen that before somewhere,’ I said. My vox bleeped. It was Wrex.
‘I’ve got that worker roster you asked for.’
‘Good. Where are you?’
‘Coming to find you at the tannery, if you’re still there.’
‘We’ll meet you on the corner of Xerxes Street. Tell your staff we have a
crime scene here in the agricultural warehouse.’
We walked out of the killing room towards the stairwell.
Fischig froze, and brought up his gun.
‘Again?’ I whispered.
He nodded, and pushed Bequin into the cover of a door jamb.
Silence, apart from the rain and the scurry of vermin. Gun braced,
Fischig looked up at the derelict roof. It may have been my imagination, but
it seemed as if a shadow had moved across the bare rafters.
I moved forward, scanning the shadows with my pistol.
Something creaked. A floorboard.
Fischig pointed to the stairs. I nodded I understood, but the last thing I
wanted was a mistaken shooting. I carefully keyed my vox and whispered,
‘Wrex. You’re not coming into the warehouse to find us, are you?’
‘Negative, inquisitor.’
‘Standby.’
Fischig had reached the top of the staircase. He peered down, aiming his
weapon.
Las fire erupted through the floorboards next to him and he threw himself
flat.
I put a trio of shots into the mouth of the staircase, but my angle was bad.
Two hard round shots spat back up the stairs and then the roar and flash
of the las came again, raking the floor.
From above, I realised belatedly. Whoever was on the stairs had a hard-
slug side arm, but the las fire was coming down from the roof.
I heard steps running on the floor below. Fischig scrambled up to give
chase but another salvo of las fire sent him ducking again.
I raised my aim and fired up into the roof tiles, blowing out holes through
which the pale light poked.
Something slithered and scrambled on the roof.
Fischig was on the stairs now, running after the second assailant.
I hurried across the third floor, following the sounds of the man on the
roof.
I saw a silhouette against the sky through a hole in the tiles and fired
again. Las-fire replied in a bright burst, but then there was a thump and
further slithering.
‘Cease fire! Give yourself up! Inquisition!’ I bellowed, using the will.
There came a much more substantial crash sounding like a whole portion
of the roof had come down. Tiles avalanched down and smashed in a room
nearby.
I slammed into the doorway, gun aimed, about to yell out a further will
command. But there was no one in the room. Piles of shattered roofslates
and bricks covered the floor beneath a gaping hole in the roof itself, and a
battered lasrifle lay amongst the debris. On the far side of the room were
some of the broken windows that Bequin had pointed out as overlooking
the tannery roof.
I ran to one. Down below, a powerful figure in dark overalls was running
for cover. The killer, escaping from me in just the same way his last victim
had escaped him – through the windows onto the tannery roof.
The distance was too far to use the will again with any effect, but my aim
and angle were good. I lined up on the back of the head a second before it
disappeared, began to apply pressure—
—and the world exploded behind me.
I CAME ROUND cradled in Bequin’s arms. ‘Don’t move, Eisenhorn. The
medics are coming.’
‘What happened?’ I asked.
‘Booby trap. The gun that guy left behind? It exploded behind you.
Powercell overload.’
‘Did Fischig get his man?’
‘Of course he did.’
He hadn’t, in fact. He’d chased the man hard down two flights of stairs
and through the main floor of the warehall. At the outer door onto the street,
the man had wheeled around and emptied his autopistol’s clip at the
chastener, forcing him into cover.
Then Captain Wrex, approaching from outside, had gunned the man
down in the doorway.
WE ASSEMBLED IN Wrex’s crowded office in the busy Arbites Mid-Rise
Sector-house. Aemos joined us, laden down with papers and data-slates,
and brought Midas Betancore with him.
‘You all right?’ Midas asked me. In his jacket of embroidered cerise silk,
he was a vivid splash of colour in the muted gloom of mid-rise.
‘Minor abrasions. I’m fine.’
‘I thought we were leaving, and here you are having all the fun without
me.’
‘I thought we were leaving too until I saw this case. Review Bequin’s
notes. I need you up to speed.’
Aemos shuffled his ancient, augmetically assisted bulk over to Wrex’s
desk and dropped his books and papers in an unceremonious pile.
‘I’ve been busy,’ he said.
‘Busy with results?’ Bequin asked.
He looked at her sourly. ‘No, actually. But I have gathered a
commendable resource of information. As the discussion advances, I may
be able to fill in blanks.’
‘No results, Aemos? Most perturbatory,’ grinned Midas, his white teeth
gleaming against his dark skin. He was mocking the old savant by using
Aemos’s favourite phrase.
I had before me the work roster of the warehouse where the three bodies
had been found, and another for the agricultural store where our fight had
occurred. Quick comparison brought up two coincident names.
‘Brell Sodakis. Vim Venik. Both worked as warehousemen before the
place closed down. Now they’re employed by Hundlemas Agricultural
Stowage.’
‘Backgrounds? Addresses?’ I asked Wrex.
‘I’ll run checks,’ she said.
‘So... we have a cult here, eh?’ Midas asked. ‘You’ve got a series of ritual
killings, at least one murder site, and now the names of two possible
cultists.’
‘Perhaps,’ I wasn’t convinced. There seemed both more and less to this
than had first appeared. Inquisitorial hunch.
The remains of the lasrifle discarded by my assailant lay on an evidence
tray. Even with the damage done by the overloading powercell, it was
apparent that this was an old model.
‘Did the powercell overload because it was dropped? It fell through the
roof, didn’t it?’ Bequin asked.
‘They’re pretty solid,’ Fischig answered.
‘Forced overload,’ I said. ‘An old Imperial Guard trick. I’ve heard they
learn how to set one off. As a last ditch in tight spots. Cornered. About to
die anyway.’
‘That’s not standard,’ said Fischig, poking at the trigger guard of the
twisted weapon. His knowledge of guns was sometimes unseemly. ‘See this
modification? It’s been machine-tooled to widen the guard around the
trigger.’
‘Why?’ I asked.
Fischig shrugged. ‘Access? For an augmetic hand with rudimentary
digits?’
We went through to a morgue room down the hall where the man Wrex
had gunned down was lying on a slab. He was middle-aged, with a
powerful frame going to seed. His skin was weatherbeaten and lined.
‘Identity?’
‘We’re working on it.’
The body had been stripped by the morgue attendants. Fischig scrutinised
it, rolling it with Wrex’s help to study the back. The man’s clothes and
effects were in plasteen bags in a tray at his feet. I lifted the bag of effects
and held it up to the light.
‘Tattoo,’ reported Fischig. ‘Imperial eagle, left shoulder. Crude, old.
Letters underneath it... capital S period, capital I period, capital I, capital
X.’
I’d just found the signet ring in the bag. Gold, with a wheatear motif.
‘S.I. IX,’ said Aemos. ‘Sameter Infantry Nine.’
THE NINTH SAMETER Infantry had been founded in Urbitane twenty-three
years before, and had served, as Aemos had already told me, in the brutal
liberation war on Surealis Six. According to city records, five hundred and
nineteen veterans of that war and that regiment had been repatriated to
Sameter after mustering out thirteen years ago, coming back from the
horrors of war to an increasingly depressed world beset by the blight of
poverty and urban collapse. Their regimental emblem, as befitted a world
once dominated by agriculture, was the wheatear.
‘They came back thirteen years ago. The oldest victim we have dates
from that time,’ said Fischig.
‘Surealis Six was a hard campaign, wasn’t it?’ I asked.
Aemos nodded. ‘The enemy was dug in. It was ferocious, brutal.
Brutalising. And the climate. Two white dwarf suns, no cloud cover. The
most punishing heat and light, not to mention ultraviolet burning.’
‘Ruins the skin,’ I murmured. ‘Makes it weatherbeaten and prematurely
aged.’
Everyone looked at the taut, lined face of the body on the slab.
‘I’ll get a list of the veterans,’ volunteered Wrex.
‘I already have one,’ said Aemos.
‘I’m betting you find the names Brell Sodakis and Vim Venik on it,’ I
said.
Aemos paused as he scanned. ‘I do,’ he agreed.
‘What about Quater Traves?’
‘Yes, he’s here. Master Gunnery Sergeant Quater Traves.’
‘What about Omin Lund?’
‘Ummm... yes. Sniper first class. Invalided out of service.’
‘The Sameter Ninth were a mixed unit, then?’ asked Bequin.
‘All our Guard foundings are,’ Wrex said proudly.
‘So, these men... and women...’ Midas mused. ‘Soldiers, been through
hell. Fighting the corruption... your idea is they brought it back here with
them? Some taint? You think they were infected by the touch of the warp on
Surealis and have been ritually killing as a way of worship back here ever
since?’
‘No,’ I said. ‘I think they’re still fighting the war.’
IT REMAINS A sad truth of the Imperium that no virtually no veteran ever
comes back from fighting its wars intact. Combat alone shreds nerves and
shatters bodies. But the horrors of the warp, and of foul xenos forms like
the tyranid, steal sanity forever, and leave veterans fearing the shadows, and
the night and, sometimes, the nature of their friends and neighbours, for the
rest of their lives.
The guards of the Ninth Sameter Infantry had come home thirteen years
before, broke by a savage war against mankind’s arch-enemy and, through
their scars and their fear, brought their war back with them.
The arbites mounted raids at once on the addresses of all the veterans on
the list, those that could be traced, those that were still alive. It appeared
that skin cancer had taken over two hundred of them in the years since their
repatriation. Surealis had claimed them as surely as if they had fallen there
in combat.
A number were rounded up. Bewildered drunks, cripples, addicts, a few
honest men and women trying diligently to carry on with their lives. For
those latter I felt especially sorry.
But about seventy could not be traced. Many may well have disappeared,
moved on, or died without it coming to the attention of the authorities. But
some had clearly fled. Lund, Traves, Sodakis, Venik for starters. Their habs
were found abandoned, strewn with possessions as if the occupant had left
in a hurry. So were the habs of twenty more belonging to names on the list.
The arbites arrived at the hab of one, ex-corporal Geffin Sancto, in time
to catch him in the act of flight. Sancto had been a flamer operator in the
guard, and like so many of his kind, had managed to keep his weapon as a
memento. Screaming the battlecry of the Sameter Ninth, he torched four
arbites in the stairwell of his building before the tactical squads of the
judiciary vaporised him in a hail of gunshots.
‘WHY ARE THEY killing?’ Bequin asked me. ‘All these years, in secret
ritual?’
‘I don’t know.’
‘You do, Eisenhorn. You so do!’
‘Very well. I can guess. The fellow worker who jokes at the Emperor’s
expense and makes your fragile sanity imagine he is tainted with the warp.
The rug-maker whose patterns suggest to you the secret encoding of Chaos
symbols. The midwife you decide is spawning the offspring of the
archenemy in the mid-rise maternity hall. The travelling evangelist who
seems just too damn fired up to be safe.’
She looked down at the floor of the land speeder. ‘They see daemons
everywhere.’
‘In everything. In every one. And, so help them, they believe they are
doing the Emperor’s work by killing. They trust no one, so they daren’t
alert the authorities. They take the eyes, the hands and the tongue... all the
organs of communication, any way the arch-enemy might transmit his foul
lies. And then they destroy the brain and heart, the organs which common
soldier myth declares must harbour daemons.’
‘So where are we going now?’ she asked.
‘Another hunch.’
THE GUILDHALL OF the Sameter Agricultural Fraternity was a massive
rag-stone building on Furnace Street, its facade decaying from the
ministrations of smog and acid rain. It had been disused for over two
decades.
Its last duty had been to serve as a recruitment post of the Sameter Ninth
during the founding. In its long hallways, the men and women of the Ninth
had signed their names, collected their starchy new fatigues, and pledged
their battle oath to the God-Emperor of mankind.
At certain times, under certain circumstances, when a proper altar to the
Emperor is not available, guard officers improvise in order to conduct their
ceremonies. An Imperial eagle, an aquila standard, is suspended from a
wall, and a sacred spot is marked on the floor beneath in yellow chalk.
The guildhall was not a consecrated building. The founding must have
been the first time the young volunteers of Urbitane had seen that done.
They’d made their vows to a yellow chalk cross and a dangling aquila.
Wrex was leading three fireteams of armed arbites, but I went in with
Midas and Fischig first, quietly. Bequin and Aemos stayed by our vehicle.
Midas was carrying his matched needle pistols, and Fischig an auto
shotgun. I clipped a slab-pattern magazine full of fresh rounds into the
precious bolt pistol given to me by Librarian Brytnoth of the Adeptus
Astartes Deathwatch chapter.
We pushed open the boarded doors of the decaying structure and edged
down the dank corridors. Rainwater pattered from the roof and the marble
floor was spotted and eaten by collected acid.
We could hear the singing. A couple of dozen voices voicing up the
Battle Hymn of the Golden Throne.
I led my companions forward, hunched low. Through the crazed
windows of an inner door we looked through into the main hall. Twenty-
three dishevelled veterans in ragged clothes were knelt down in ranks on
the filthy floor, their heads bowed to the rusty Imperial eagle hanging on the
wall as they sang. There was a yellow chalk cross on the floor under the
aquila. Each veteran had a backpack or rucksack and a weapon by their feet.
My heart ached. This was how it had gone over two decades before,
when they came to the service, young and fresh and eager. Before the war.
Before the horror.
‘Let me try... try to give them a chance,’ I said.
‘Gregor!’ Midas hissed.
‘Let me try, for their sake. Cover me.’
I slipped into the back of the hall, my gun lowered at my side, and joined
in the verse.
One by one, the voices died away and bowed heads turned sideways to
look at me. Down the aisle, at the chalk cross of the altar, Lund, Traves and
a bearded man I didn’t know stood gazing at me.
In the absence of other voices, I finished the hymn.
‘It’s over,’ I said. ‘The war is over and you have all done your duty.
Above and beyond the call.’
Silence.
‘I am Inquisitor Eisenhorn. I’m here to relieve you. The careful war
against the blight of Chaos that you have waged through Urbitane in secret
is now over. The Inquisition is here to take over. You can stand down.’
Two or three of the hunched veterans began to weep.
‘You lie,’ said Lund, stepping forward.
‘I do not. Surrender your weapons and I promise you will be treated
fairly and with respect.’
‘Will...will we get medals?’ the bearded man asked, in a quavering voice.
‘The gratitude of the God-Emperor will be with you always.’
More were weeping now. Out of fear, anxiety or plain relief.
‘Don’t trust him!’ said Traves. ‘It’s another trick!’
‘I saw you in my bar,’ said Lund, stepping forward. ‘You came in
looking,’ Her voice was empty, distant.
‘I saw you on the tannery roof, Omin Lund. You’re still a fine shot,
despite the hand.’
She looked down at her prosthetic with a wince of shame.
‘Will we get medals?’ the bearded man repeated, eagerly. Traves turned
on him. ‘Of course we won’t, Spake, you cretin! He’s here to kill us!’
‘I’m not—’ I began.
‘I want medals!’ the bearded man, Spake, screamed suddenly, sliding his
laspistol up from his belt with the fluid speed only a trained soldier can
manage.
I had no choice.
His shot tore through the shoulder padding of my storm coat. My bolt
exploded his head, spraying blood across the rusty metal eagle on the wall.
Pandemonium.
The veterans leapt to their feet firing wildly scattering, running.
I threw myself flat as shots tore out the wall plaster behind me. At some
point Fischig and Midas burst in, weapons blazing. I saw three or four
veterans drop, sliced through by silent needles and another six tumble as
shotgun rounds blew them apart.
Traves came down the aisle, blasting his old service-issue lasrifle at me. I
rolled and fired, but my shot went wide. His face distorted as a needle
round punched through it and he fell in a crumpled heap.
Wrex and her fireteams exploded in. Flames from some spilled
accelerants billowed up the wall.
I got up, and then was throw back by a las shot that blew off my left
hand.
Spinning, falling, I saw Lund, struggling to make her prosthetic fingers
work the unmodified trigger of Traves’s lasgun.
My bolt round hit her with such force she flew back down the aisle, hit
the wall, and tore the Imperial aquila down.
NOT A SINGLE veteran escaped the Guildhall alive. The firefight raged for
two hours. Wrex lost five men to the experienced guns of the Sameter Ninth
veterans. They stood to the last. No more can be said of any Imperial Guard
unit.
THE WHOLE AFFAIR left me sour and troubled. I have devoted my life to
the service of the Imperium, to protect it against its manifold foes, inside
and out.
But not against its servants. However misguided, they were loyal and
true. However wrong, they were shaped that way by the service they had
endured in the Emperor’s name.
Lund cost me my hand. A hand for a hand. They gave me a prosthetic on
Sameter. I never used it. For two years, I made do with a fused stump.
Surgeons on Messina finally gave me a fully functional graft.
I consider it still a small price to pay for them.
I have never been back to Sameter. Even today, they are still finding the
secreted, hidden bodies. So very many, dead in the Emperor’s name.
MALLEUS
BY ORDER OF HIS MOST HOLY MAJESTY
THE GOD-EMPEROR OF TERRA
SEQUESTERED INQUISITORIAL DOSSIERS
AUTHORISED PERSONS ONLY
CASE FILE 442:41F:JL3:Kbu
Please enter your authority code > ********
Validating...
Thank you, Inquisitor. You may proceed.
CLASSIFICATION: Primary Level Intelligence
CLEARANCE: Obsidian
ENCRYPTION: Cryptox v 2.6
DATE: 337.M41
AUTHOR: Inquisitor Javes Thysser, Ordo Xenos
SUBJECT: A matter for your urgent consideration
RECIPIENT: Lord Inquisitor Phlebas Alessandro Rorken, Inquisition
High Council Officio, Scarus Sector, Scarus Major
Salutations, lord!
In the name of the God-Emperor, hallowed he his eternal vigil, and by the
High Lords of Terra, I commend myself, your Highness, and hope I may
speak plainly, in confidence, of a delicate matter.
To begin generally, my work on Vogel Passionata is now complete and
my noble duty to the Great Inquisition of Mankind discharged successfully.
My full, documented report will follow in a few days, once my savants have
finished compiling it, and I trust that your Highness will find it satisfactory
reading. To summarise, for the purpose of this brief missive, I am proud to
declare that the malign influence of the so-called wyrd-kin has been
expunged from the hive cities of Vogel Passionata, and the inner circle of
that obscene xenophile order broken forever and put to cleansing flame.
Their self-proclaimed messiah, Gaethon Richter, is himself dead by my
hand.
A matter, however, has arisen from this. I am troubled by it, and unsure
as to the best course of action. For this reason I am writing to you,
Highness, in the hope of receiving guidance.
Richter did not go without a fight, as you might expect. In the final,
bloody throes of the battle, as my combined forces stormed his fastness
beneath the main hive, he called forth to oppose us a being of dreadful
power. It slaughtered nineteen of the Imperial Guardsmen assigned to my
purge-team, as well as Inquisitor Bluchas, Interrogators Faruline and
Seetmol, and Captain Ellen Ossel, my pilot. It would have slain me too, but
for the strangest mischance.
The being was an unholy thing, made like a man, but gleaming with an
inner light. Its voice was soft, its touch was fire. I believe it was a
daemonhost of unfathomable power, with the most vile propensity for spite
and cruelty. My report will recount in detail the particular abominations
this being subjected Seetmol and Ossel to before it destroyed them. I will
spare you those dreadful facts here.
Having disposed of Bluchas, it cornered me on an upper landing in the
fastness as I was penetrating the inner sanctum of the wyrd-kin ‘messiah’.
My weapons did no harm to it, and it laughed gleefully as it threw me
backwards down the length of the staircase with a casual flick of its wrist.
Dazed, I looked up as it descended towards me, unable to conceive of a
defence against it. I believe I may have clawed around to find my fallen
weapon.
That gesture caused it to speak. I report the words exactly. It said, ‘Don’t
worry now, Gregor. You are far too valuable to waste. Indulge me, just a
little scar to make it look authentic.’
Its talons tore across my chest and throat, and ripped away my
rebreather mask. The wounds will heal, they tell me, but they were deep and
excruciating. The being then paused, as it saw my face properly for the first
time, free from the mask set. Dreadful dark anger flared in its eyes. It said –
forgive me, Highness, but this is the fact of it – it said, ‘You are not
Eisenhorn! I have been tricked!’
I believe that it would have killed me there and then, but for the frontal
assault of the Adeptes Astartes Aurora chapter, which tore into the hall at
that precise moment. In the mayhem, the being fled, though I cannot even
now say how. Whatever the terrifying strength of the Astartes, this thing was
a hundredfold more powerful.
Later, on his knees, with my weapon to his head, seconds before his
execution, Gaethon Richter begged for ‘Cherubael’ to return. He wailed he
could not understand why ‘Cherubael’ had abandoned him. I believe he
was speaking of the daemonhost.
I trust your Highness can see my trouble. Mistaking me for another of
our kind – and an unimpeachably worthy example, I might add – this thing
spared my life. It seemed to me, indeed, that it did so with pre-arranged
connivance.
Inquisitor Gregor Eisenhorn is highly regarded, numerously honoured
and justly praised as an example of all that is good, strong and dogmatic
about our brotherhood. However, since this circumstance, I have begun to
wonder, to fear that—
I feel I cannot say what I wonder or fear. But I thought you should know
of this, and know it soon. It is my belief that the Ordo Malleus should be
informed, if only as a precaution.
I hope and pray this matter will be found empty of truth and
consequence. But, as you taught me, sir, it is always better to be sure.
Sealed as my true word by this, my hand, this 276th day of the year
337.M41.
The Emperor Protects!
Your servant,
Thysser
[Message ends.]
ONE
I discover I am dead.
Under dark fire, the lair of Sadia.
Tantalid, unwelcome.
AS I GROW older, may the Emperor protect me, I find I measure my
history in terms of milestones, those occurrences of such intense moment
they will never pass from one’s memory: my induction into the blessed
ordos of the Inquisition; my first day as a neophyte assigned to the great
Hapshant; my first successful prosecution; the heretic Lemete Syre; my
elevation to full inquisitorial rank at the age of twenty-four standard years;
the long-drawn out Nassar case; the affair of the Necroteuch; the P’glao
Conspiracy.
Milestones, all of them. Marked indelibly onto the engrams of my
memory. And, alongside them, I remember the Darknight that came at the
end of the month of Umbris, Imperial year 338.M41, with particular clarity.
For that bloody end was the start of it. The great milestone of my life.
I was on Lethe Eleven under instruction from the Ordo Xenos, deep in
work, with the accursed xenophile Beldame Sadia almost in my grasp. Ten
weeks to find her, ten hours to close the trap. I had been without sleep for
three days; without food and water for two. Psychic phantoms triggered by
the Darknight eclipse were rolling my mind. I was dying of binary poison.
Then Tantalid turned up.
To appraise you, Lethe Eleven is a densely populated world at the leading
edge of the Helican sub-sector, its chief industries being metalwork and
shield technologies. At the end of every Umbris, Lethe’s largest moon
matches, by some cosmological coincidence, the path, orbit and
comparative size of the local star, and the world is plunged into eclipse for a
two week period known as the Darknight.
The effect is quite striking. For the space of fourteen days, the sky goes a
cold, dark red, the hue of dried blood, and the moon, Kux, dominates the
heavens, a peerlessly black orb surrounded by a crackling corona of
writhing amber flame. This event has become – students of Imperial ritual
will be unsurprised to learn – the key seasonal holiday for all Letheans.
Fires of all shape, size and manner are lit as Darknight begins, and the
population stands vigil to ensure that none go out until the eclipse ends.
Industry is suspended. Leave is granted. Riotous carnivals and firelit
parades spill through the cities. Licentiousness and law-breaking are rife.
Above it all, the dark fire of the eclipsed sun haloes the black moon.
There is even a tradition of fortune-casting grown up around the
interpretation of the corona’s form.
I had hoped to catch the Beldame before Darknight began, but she was
one step ahead of me. Her chief poisoner, Pye, who had learned his skills in
early life as a prisoner of the renegade dark eldar, so the story went,
managed to plant a toxin in my drinking water that would remain inert until
I ingested the second component of its binary action.
I was a dead man. The Beldame had killed me.
My savant, Aemos, accidentally discovered the toxin in my body, and
was able to prevent me from eating or drinking anything further. But
graceless death beckoned me inexorably. My only chance of survival was to
capture the Beldame and her vassal Pye and extract the solution to my
doom from them.
Out in the dark streets of the city, my followers did their work. I had
eighty loyal servants scouring the streets. In my rooms at the Hippodrome, I
waited, parched, unsteady, distant.
Ravenor came up trumps. Ravenor, of course. With his promise, it
wouldn’t be long before he left the rank of interrogator behind and became
a full inquisitor in his own right.
He found Beldame Sadia’s lair in the catacombs beneath the derelict
church of Saint Kiodrus. I hurried to respond to his call.
‘You should stay here,’ Bequin told me, but I shook her off.
‘I have to do this, Alizabeth.’
Alizabeth Bequin was by that time one hundred and twenty-five years
old. She was still as beautiful and as active as she had been in her thirties,
thanks to discreet augmetic surgery and a regime of juvenat-drugs. Framed
by the veil of her starch-silk dress, her handsome face and dark eyes glared
at me.
‘It will kill you, Gregor,’ she said.
‘If it does, then it is time for Gregor Eisenhorn to die.’
Bequin looked across the gloomy, candlelit room at Aemos, but he
simply shook his ancient, augmented skull sadly. There were times, he
knew, when there was simply no reasoning with me.
I went down into the street, where canister fires blazed and masked
revellers capered and caroused. I was dressed all in black, with a floor
length coat of heavy black leather.
Despite that, despite the flames around me, I was cold. Fatigue, and the
lack of nourishment, were eating into my bones.
I looked at the moon. Threads of heat around a cold, black heart. Like
me, I thought, like me.
A carriage had been called for. Six painted hippines, snorting and bridled,
teamed to a stately landau. Several members of my staff waited nearby, and
hurried forward when they saw me emerge onto the street.
I assessed them quickly. Good people all, or they wouldn’t have made the
cut to be here. With a few wordless gestures I pulled out four to accompany
me and then sent the rest back to other duties.
The four chosen mounted the carriage with me. Mescher Qus, an ex-
Imperial Guardsman from Vladislav; Arianrhod Esw Sweydyr, the
swordswoman from Carthae; and Beronice and Zu Zeng, two females from
Bequin’s Distaff.
At the last moment, Beronice was ordered out of the carriage and
Alizabeth Bequin took her place. Bequin had quit active service with me
sixty-eight standard years before in order to develop and run her Distaff, but
there were still times she didn’t trust her people and insisted on
accompanying me herself.
I realised this was just such a time because Bequin didn’t expect me to
survive and wanted to be with me to the end. In truth, I didn’t expect to
survive either.
The carriage started off with a whipcrack, and we rambled through the
streets, skirting around ceremonial fires and torchlit processions.
None of us spoke. Qus checked and loaded his autocannon and adjusted
his body armour. Arianrhod drew her sabre and tested the cutting edge with
one of her own head hairs. Zu Zeng, a native of Vitria, sat with her head
down, her long glass robes clinking with the carriage’s motion.
Bequin stared at me.
‘What?’ I asked eventually.
She shook her head and looked away.
The church of Saint Kiodrus lay in the waterfowlers’ district, close to the
edge of the city and the vast, lizard-haunted salt-licks. The darkness
throbbed with insect rhythms.
The carriage stopped in a street of blackly rotting stone pilings, two
hundred metres short of the church’s wrecked silhouette. The sky was
amber darkness. Behind us, the city was alive with bright points of fire. The
neighbourhood around us was a dead ruin, slowly submitting to the salty
hunger of the marshes.
‘Talon wishes Thorn, rapturous beasts within,’ Ravenor said over the
vox-link.
‘Thorn impinging multifarious, the blades of disguise,’ I responded. My
throat was dry and hoarse.
‘Talon observes moment. Torus pathway requested, pattern ebony.’
‘Pattern denied. Pattern crucible. Rose thorn wishes hiatus.’
‘Confirm.’
We spoke using Glossia, an informal verbal code known only to my staff.
Even on an open vox-channel, our communications would be impenetrable
to the foe.
I adjusted my vox-unit’s channel.
‘Thorn wishes Aegis, to me, pattern crucible.’
‘Aegis arising,’ Betancore, my pilot, responded from far away. ‘Pattern
confirmed.’
My gun-cutter, with its fabulous firepower, was now inbound. I looked to
the others in the shadows as I drew my weapon.
‘Now is the time,’ I told them.
WE EDGED INTO the gloomy, slime-swathed ruins of the church. There
was a heady stink of wet corruption in the air and sheens of salt clung to
every surface. Clusters of maggot-like worms ate into the stones, and
flinched back as the fierce beams of our flashlights found them.
Qus ran point, his autocannon swinging from side to side, hunting targets
with the red laser rangefinder that projected from the corner of his
bionically enhanced left eye. He was a stocky man, rippling with muscle
under his harness of ceramite armour. He had painted his blunt face in the
colours of his old regiment, the 90th Vladislavan.
Arianrhod and I tailed him. She’d dulled her sabre’s blade with brick dust
but still it hooked the light as she turned it in her hands. Arianrhod Esw
Sweydyr was well over two metres tall, quite the tallest human woman I
have ever met, though such stature is common amongst the people of far
away Carthae. Her long-boned frame was clad in a leather bodysuit
embossed with bronze studs, over which she wore a long, tasselled cloak of
patchwork hide. Her silver hair was plaited with beads. The sabre was
called Barbarisater and had been carried by women of the Esw Sweydyr
tribe for nineteen generations. From the braided grip to the tip of the
curved, engraved blade, it measured almost a metre and a half. Long, lean,
slender, like the woman who wielded it. Already I could sense the vibration
of the psychic energies she was feeding into it. Woman and blade had
become one living thing.
Arianrhod had served with my staff for five years, and I was still learning
the intricacies of her martial prowess. Ordinarily I’d be noting every detail
of her combat trance methods, but I was too fatigued, too drawn out with
hunger and thirst.
Bequin and Zu Zeng brought up the rear, side by side, Bequin in a long
black gown with a ruff of black feathers around the shoulders, and Zu Zeng
in her unreflective robes of Vitrian glass. They stayed back far enough so
the aura of their psychic blankness would not conflict with the abilities of
Arianrhod or myself, yet close enough to move forward in defence if the
time came.
The Inquisition – and many other institutions, august or otherwise – has
long been aware of the usefulness of untouchables, those rare human souls
who simply have no psionic signature whatsoever and thus disrupt or negate
even the most strenuous psychic attack. When I met her on Hubris, a
century before, Alizabeth Bequin had been the first untouchable I had ever
encountered. Despite her unnerving presence – even non-psykers find
untouchables difficult to be around – I had added her to my staff and she
had proved to be invaluable. After many years of service, she had retired to
form the Distaff, a cadre of untouchables recruited from all across the
Imperium. The Distaff was my own private resource, although I often
loaned their services to others of my order. They numbered around forty
members now, trained and managed by Bequin. It is my belief that the
Distaff was collectively one of the most potent anti-psyker weapons in the
Emperor’s domain.
THE RUINS WERE festering with shadows and dank salt. Rot-beetles
scurried over the flaking mosaic portraits of long-dead worthies that stared
out of alcoves. Worms crawled everywhere. The steady chirrup of insects
from the salt-licks was like someone shaking a rattle. As we probed deeper,
we came upon inner yards and grave-squares where neglect had shaken free
places-tones and revealed the smeared bones of the long interred in the
loamy earth below. In places, rot-browned skulls had been dug out and
piled in loose pyramids.
It saddened me to see this holy place so befouled and dreary. Kiodrus had
been a great man, had stood and fought at the right hand of the sacred Beati
Sabbat during her mighty crusade. But that had been a long time ago and far
away, and his cult of worship had faded. It would take another crusade into
the distant Sabbat Worlds to rekindle interest in him and his forgotten
deeds.
Qus called a halt and pointed towards the steps of an undercroft that led
away below ground. I waved him back, indicating the tiny strip of red
ribbon placed under a stone on the top step. A marker, left by Ravenor,
indicating this was not a suitable entry point. Peering into the staircase
gloom, I saw what he had seen: the half buried cables of a tremor-detector
and what looked like bundles of tube charges.
We found three more entrances like it, all marked by Ravenor. The
Beldame had secured her fastness well.
‘Through there, do you think, sir?’ Qus whispered, pointing towards the
columns of a roofless cloister.
I was about to agree when Arianrhod hissed ‘Barbarisater thirsts...’
I looked at her. She was prowling to the left, towards an archway in the
base of the main bell-tower. She moved silently, the sabre held upright in a
two-handed grip, her tasselled cloak floating out behind her like angelic
wings.
I gestured to Qus and the women and we formed in behind her. I drew
my prized boltpistol, given to me by Librarian Brytnoth of the Adeptus
Astartes Deathwatch Chapter on the eve of the Purge of Izar, almost a
century before. It had never failed me.
The Beldame’s minions came out of the night. Eight of them, just
shadows that disengaged themselves from the surrounding darkness. Qus
began to fire, blasting back a shadow that pounced at him. I fired too,
raking bolt rounds into the ghostly opposition.
Beldame Sadia was a heretic witch and consorted with xenos breeds. She
had a particular fascination with the beliefs and necromancies of the dark
eldar, and had made it her life-cause to tap that foul alien heritage for power
and lore. She was one of the only humans I knew of who had struck
collaborative pacts with their wretched kabals. Rumour had it she had been
recently initiated into the cult of Kaela Mensha Khaine, in his aspect as the
Murder-God beloved of the eldar renegades.
As befitted such a loyalty, she recruited only convicted murderers for her
minions. The men who attacked us in that blighted yard were base killers,
shrouded in shadow fields she had bought, borrowed or stolen from her
inhuman allies.
One swung at me with a long-bladed halberd and I blew off his head.
Just. My body was tired and my reactions were damnably slow.
I saw Arianrhod. She was a balletic blur, her beaded hair streaming out
above her flying cloak. Barbarisater purred in her hands.
She severed the neck of one shadow with a backward slash, then
pirouetted around and chopped another in two from neck to pelvis. The
sabre was moving so fast I could barely see it. She stamped hard and
reversed her direction of movement, causing a third shadow to sprawl as he
overshot her. His head flew off, and the sabre swept on to impale a fourth
without breaking its fluid motion. Then Arianrhod swept around, the sword
held horizontally over her right shoulder. The steel haft of the fifth
shadow’s polearm was cut in two and he staggered back. Barbarisater
described a figure of eight in the air and another shadow fell, cut into
several sections.
The last minion turned and fled. A shot from Bequin’s laspistol brought
him down.
A pulse was pounding in my temple and I realised I had to sit down
before I passed out. Qus grabbed me by the arm and helped me down onto a
block of fallen wall stone.
‘Gregor?’
‘I’m all right, Alizabeth... give me a moment...’
‘You shouldn’t have come, you old fool! You should have left this to
your disciples!’
‘Shut up, Alizabeth.’
‘I will not, Gregor. It’s high time you understood your own limits.’
I looked up at her. ‘I have no limits,’ I said.
Qus laughed involuntarily.
‘I believe him, Mistress Bequin,’ said Ravenor, stepping from the
shadows. Emperor damn his stealth, even Arianrhod had not seen him
coming. She had to force her sabre down to stop it slicing at him.
Gideon Ravenor was a shade shorter than me, but strong and well-made.
He was only thirty-four years old. His long black hair was tied back from
his sculpted, high cheek-boned face. He wore a grey bodyglove and a long
leather storm coat. The psycannon mounted on his left shoulder whirred and
clicked around to aim at Arianrhod.
‘Careful, swordswoman,’ he said. ‘My weapon has you squarely.’
‘And it will still have me squarely when your head is lying in the dust,’
she replied.
They both laughed. I knew they had been lovers for over a year, but still
in public they sparred and sported with each other.
Ravenor snapped his fingers and his companion, the festering mutant
Gonvax, shambled out of hiding, drool stringing from his thick, malformed
lips. He carried a flamer, the fuel-tanks strapped to the hump of his twisted
back.
I rose. ‘What have you found?’ I asked Ravenor.
‘The Beldame – and a way in,’ he said.
BELDAME SADIA’S LAIR was in the sacrarium beneath the main chapel of
the ruin. Ravenor had scouted it carefully, and found an entry point in one
of the raptured crypts that perhaps even she didn’t know about.
My respect for Ravenor was growing daily. I had never had a disciple
like him. He excelled at almost every skill an inquisitor is meant to have. I
looked forward to the day when I supported his petition to inquisitorial
status. He deserved it. The Inquisition needed men like him.
SINGLE-FILE, WE entered the crypt behind Ravenor. He drew our attention
carefully to every pitfall and loose flag. The stench of salt and old bones
was intolerable, and I felt increasingly weak in the close, hot air.
We emerged into a stone gallery that overlooked a wide subterranean
chamber. Pitch-lamps sputtered in the darkness and there was a strong smell
of dried herbs and fouler unguents.
Beings were worshipping in the chamber. Worshipping is the only word I
can use. Naked, daubed in blood, twenty depraved humans were conducting
a dark eldar rite around a torture pit in which a battered man was chained
and stretched.
The stink of blood and excrement wafted to me. I tried not to throw up,
for I knew the effort would make me pass out.
‘There, you see him?’ Ravenor whispered into my ear as we crawled to
the edge of the gallery.
I made out a pale-skinned ghoul in the distant shadows.
‘A haemonculus, sent by the Kabal of the Fell Witch to witness the
Beldame’s practices.’
I tried to make out detail, but the figure was too deep in the shadows.
I registered grinning teeth and some form of blade device around the
right hand.
‘Where’s Pye?’ asked Bequin, whispering too.
Ravenor shook his head. Then he seized my arm and squeezed. Even
whispers were no longer possible.
The Beldame herself had entered the chamber.
She walked on eight spider legs, a huge augmetic chassis of hooked
arachnid limbs that skittered on the stones. Inquisitor Atelath, Emperor
grant him rest, had destroyed her real legs one hundred and fifty years
before my birth.
She was veiled in black gauze that looked like cobwebs. I could actually
feel her evil like a fever-sweat.
She paused at the edge of the torture pit, raised her veil with withered
hands and spat at the victim below. It was venom, squirted from the glands
built into her mouth behind her augmetic fangs. The viscous fluid hit the
sacrificial victim full in the face and he gurgled in agony as the front of his
skull was eaten away.
Sadia began to speak, her voice low and sibilant. She spoke in the
language of the dark eldar and her naked brethren writhed and moaned.
‘I’ve seen enough,’ I whispered. ‘She’s mine. Ravenor, can you manage
the haemonculus?’
He nodded.
On my signal, we launched our attack, leaping down from the gallery,
weapons blazing. Several of the worshippers were punched apart by Qus’s
heavy fire.
Whooping the battlecry of Carthae, Arianrhod flew at the haemonculus,
way ahead of Ravenor.
I realised I had pushed it too far. I was giddy as I landed, and stumbled.
Her metal spider legs striking sparks from the flagstones, Beldame Sadia
reared up at me, ululating. She pulled back her veil to spit at me.
Abruptly, she reeled backwards, thunderstruck by the combined force of
Bequin and Zu Zeng who flanked her.
I gathered myself and fired at her, blowing one of the augmetic limbs off
her spider-frame.
She spat anyway but missed. The venom sizzled into the cold stone slabs
at my feet.
‘Imperial Inquisition!’ I bellowed. ‘In the name of the hallowed God-
Emperor, you and your kind are charged with treason and manifest
disbelief!’
I raised my weapon. She flew at me.
Her sheer bulk brought me down.
One spider limb stabbed entirely through the meat of my left thigh. Her
steel fangs, like curved needles, snarled into my face. I saw her eyes, for an
instant, black and without limit or sanity.
She spat.
I wrenched my head around to avoid the corrosive spew, and fired my
bolt pistol up into her.
The impact threw her backwards, all four hundred kilos of wizened witch
and bionic carriage.
I rolled over.
The haemonculus had met Arianrhod’s attack face on, the glaive around
his right hand screaming as the xenos-made blades whirled. He was stick-
thin and clad in shiny black leather, his grin a perpetual consequence of the
way the colourless skin of his face was pinned back around his skull. He
wore metal jewellery fashioned from the weapons of the warriors he had
slain.
I could hear Ravenor crying out Arianrhod’s name.
Barbarisater sliced at the darting eldar monster, but he evaded, his
physical speed unbelievable.
She swung again, placing two perfect kill strokes that somehow missed
him altogether. He sent her lurching away in a mist of blood. For the first
time since I had known her, I heard Arianrhod yelp in pain.
Flames belched across the chamber. Gonvax shambled forward, forever
loyal to his master... and his master’s lover. He tried to squirt flames at the
haemonculus, but it was suddenly somehow behind him. Gonvax shrieked
as the glaive eviscerated him.
With a howl, Arianrhod threw herself at the dark eldar. I saw her, for a
moment, frozen in mid-air, her sabre descending. Then the two bodies
struck each other, and flew apart.
The sabre had taken off the eldar’s left arm at the shoulder. But his
glaive...
I knew she was dead. No one could survive that, not even a noble
swordswoman from far Carthae.
Bequin was pulling me up. ‘Gregor! Gregor!’
Beldame Sadia, her spider carriage limping, was fleeing towards the
staircase.
Something exploded behind me. I could hear Ravenor bellowing in rage
and pain.
I ran after the Beldame.
THE UPPER CHAPEL, above ground, was silent and cold. Darknight flares
glimmered through the lines of stained glass windows.
‘You can’t escape, Sadia!’ I shouted, but my voice was thin and hoarse.
I glimpsed her as she skittered between the columns to my left. A shadow
in the shadows.
‘Sadia! Sadia, old hag, you have killed me! But you will die by my
hand!’
To my right now, another scuttling shadow, half-seen. I moved that way.
I was stabbed hard from behind, in between my shoulder blades. I turned
as I fell, and saw the manic face of the Beldame’s arch-poisoner, Pye. He
cackled and giggled, prancing, a spent injector tube clutched in each hand.
‘Dead! Dead, dead, dead, dead, dead!’ he warbled.
He had injected me with the secondary part of the poison.
I fell over, my muscles already cramping.
‘How does it feel, inquisitor?’ Pye chuckled, capering towards me.
‘Emperor damn you,’ I gasped and shot him through the face. I blacked
out.
WHEN I CAME round, Beldame Sadia had me by the throat and was
shaking me with her augmetic mandibles.
‘I want you awake!’ she hissed, her veil falling back and the toxin sacs in
her wizened cheeks bulging. ‘I want you awake to feel this!’
Her head exploded in a spray of bone shards and tissue. The spider
carriage went into convulsions and threw me across the chapel. It continued
to scuttle and dance, her corpse jerking slackly from it, for a full minute
before it collapsed.
I was face down on the floor, and I tried to turn, but the advancing effect
of the poison was shutting me down.
Shutting me down hard.
Massive feet strode into my field of vision. Armoured feet, plated with
ceramite.
I rolled as best I could and looked up.
Witchfinder Tantalid stood over me, holstering the boltgun he had used to
kill Beldame Sadia. He was encased in gold-encrusted battle armour, the
pennants of the Ministorum suspended over his back plate.
‘You are an accursed heretic, Eisenhorn. And I claim your life.’
Not Tantalid, I thought as my consciousness spun away again. Not
Tantalid. Not now.
TWO
Something so typically Betancore.
My fallen.
The summons.
FROM THE MOMENT I slipped into unconsciousness at the feet of the
vicious Witchfinder Tantalid, I knew nothing more until I woke, twenty-
nine hours later, aboard my gun-cutter. I remembered nothing about the
seven attempts to shock my system back to life, the cardiac massages, the
anti-venom shots injected directly into my heart muscle, the fight to make
me live again. I learned all about it later, as I slowly recovered. For days, I
was as weak as a feline whelp.
Most particularly, I knew nothing about the way Tantalid had been
denied. Bequin told me, a day or two after my first awakening. It had been
something so typically Betancore.
Alizabeth had been hard on my heels up the stairs from the sacrarium, in
time to see Tantalid’s arrival. She had known him at once. The Witchfinder
is notorious throughout the sub-sector.
He’d been about to kill me, and I was unconscious at his feet, going into
anaphylactic shock with the venom bonding and seething in my veins.
She’d cried out, fumbling for her weapon.
Then light – hard, powerful light – had streamed in through the stained
glass windows. There was a roaring sound. My gun-cutter, its lamps on full
beam, rose to a hover over the rained chapel, lighting up the night.
Guessing what was about to follow, Bequin had thrown herself down.
Betancore’s voice had boomed out from the hull tannoy of the hovering
gunship.
‘Imperial Inquisition! Step away from the inquisitor now!’
Tantalid had squinted up into the glare, his stringy tortoise head turning
in the rim of his massive carapace armour.
‘Ministorum officer!’ he had yelled back, his voice amplified by his suit’s
vox-unit. ‘Back off! Back off now! This heretic is mine!’
Bequin grinned as she told me Betancore’s response. ‘Never argue with a
gun-cutter, you asshole.’
The slaved servitors in the cutter’s blunt wingtips opened fire, hosing the
chapel with autocannon shells. The stained glass windows had all shattered,
statues had been decapitated, flagstones had disintegrated. Hit at least once,
Tantalid had fallen backwards into the dust and debris. His body had not
been found, so I presumed the bastard had survived. But he had been smart
enough to flee.
My prone body had not been touched, even though the chapel around me
had been peppered with fire.
Typical Betancore bravado. Typical Betancore finesse.
She was just like her damned father.
‘SEND HER TO me,’ I told Bequin as I lay back in my cot, half-dead and
feeling terrible.
Medea Betancore looked in a few minutes later. Like her father, Midas,
she was clad in the red-piped black suit of a Glavian pilot, and she proudly
wore his old cerise, embroidered jacket.
Her skin, like Midas’s, like all that of all Glavians, was dark. She grinned
at me.
‘I owe you,’ I said.
Medea shook her head. ‘Nothing my father wouldn’t have done.’ She sat
on the foot of my cot.
‘He’d have killed Tantalid, though,’ she decided.
‘He was a better shot.’
That grin again, pearl white teeth framed by ebony skin.
‘Yeah, he was that.’
‘But you’ll do,’ I smiled.
She saluted and left.
MIDAS BETANCORE HAD been dead for twenty-six years. I missed him
still. He was the closest thing to a friend I had ever had. Bequin and Aemos,
they were allies, and I trusted them with my life. But Midas...
May the God-Emperor rot Fayde Thuring for taking him. May the God-
Emperor lead me to Fayde Thuring one day so that I and Medea may
avenge Midas.
Medea had never known her father. She’d been born a month after his
death, raised by her mother on Glavia, and had come into my service by
chance. I was her godfather, a promise to Midas. Duty bound, I had visited
Glavia for her ascension to adulthood, and watched her drive a Glavian
long-prow through the vortex rapids of the Stilt Hills during the Rites of
Majority. One glimpse of her skills had convinced me.
ARIANRHOD ESW SWEYDYR was dead. So were Gonvax and Qus. The
battle in the sacrarium had been fierce. Ravenor had killed the raging
haemonculus, but only after it had ripped open his belly and taken off Zu
Zeng’s left ear.
Gideon Ravenor was in intensive care in the main city infirmary of
Lethe. We would collect him once he was out of danger.
I wondered how long that would be. I wondered how he would be. He
had loved Arianrhod, loved her dearly. I prayed this loss would not set him
back too far.
I mourned Qus and the swordswoman. Qus had been with me for
nineteen years. That Darknight in the chapel had robbed me of so much.
Qus was buried with full honours in the Imperial Guard Memorial
Cenotaph at Lethe Majeure. Arianrhod was burned on a bare hill west of the
salt-licks. I was too weak to attend either service.
AEMOS BROUGHT THE sabre Barbarisater to me after the pyre. I wrapped it
in a vizzy-cloth and a silk sheet. I knew I was duty bound to return it to the
tribal elders of the Esw Sweydyr on Carthae before long. That would mean
a round trip of at least a year. I had no time for it. I put the wrapped sword
in my safebox. It barely fitted.
AS I WORKED my way back to health, I considered Tantalid. Arnaut
Tantalid had risen from the rank of confessor militant in the Missionaria
Galaxia seventy years before to become one of the Ministorum’s most
feared and ruthless witch-hunters. Like many of his breed, he followed the
doctrines of Sebastian Thor with such unswerving precision it bordered on
clinical obsession.
To most of the common folk of the Imperium, there would be blessed
little to choose between an Ordo Xenos inquisitor such as myself and an
ecclesiarchy witchkiller like Tantalid. We both hunt out the damning
darkness that stalks mankind, we are both figures of fear and dread, we are
both, so it seems, laws unto ourselves.
Twinned though we may be in so many ways, we could not be more
distinct. It is my personal belief that the Adeptus Ministorum, the
Imperium’s vast organ of faith and worship, should focus its entire attention
on the promulgation of the true church of the God-Emperor and leave the
persecution of heretics to the Inquisition. Our jurisdictions often clash.
There have, to my certain knowledge, been two wars of faith in the last
century provoked and sustained by just such rivalry.
Tantalid and I had locked horns twice before. On Bradell’s World, five
decades earlier, we had faced each other across the marble floor of a synod
court, arguing for the right to extradite the psyker Elbone Parsuval. On that
occasion, he had triumphed, thanks mainly to the strict Thorian mindset of
the Ministorum elders of Bradell’s World.
Then, just eight years ago, our paths had crossed again on Kuuma.
Tantalid’s fanatical hatred – indeed, I would venture, fear – of the psyker
was by then insurmountable. I made no secret of the fact that I employed
psychic methods in the pursuit of my work. There were psychic adepts in
my staff, and I myself had worked to develop my own psychic abilities over
the years. Such is my right, as an authorised bearer of the Inquisition’s seal.
In my eyes, he was a blinkered zealot with psychotic streak. In his, I was
the spawn of witches and a heretic.
No courtroom argument for us on Kuuma. A little war instead. It lasted
an afternoon, and raged through the tiered streets of the oasis town at Unat
Akim.
Twenty-eight latent psykers, none older than fourteen, had been rooted
out of the population of Kuuma’s sprawling capital city during a purge, and
sequestered prior to their collection by the Black Ships. They were recruits,
a precious resource, untainted and ready to be shaped by the Adeptus
Astropathicus into worthy servants of the God-Emperor. Some of them,
perhaps, would have the ultimate honour of joining the choir of the
Astronomican. They were frightened and confused, but this was their
salvation.
Better to be found early and turned to good service than to remain
undetected and become tainted, corrupt and a threat to our entire society.
But before the Black Ships could arrive to take them, they were spirited
away by renegade slavers working in collusion with corrupt officials in the
local Administratum. Vast sums could be made on the black market for
unregistered, virgin psychic slaves.
I followed the slavers’ trail across the seif dunes to Unat Akim with the
intention of liberating the youngsters. Tantalid made his way there to
exterminate them all as witches.
By the end of the fight, I had driven the witchfinder and his cohorts,
mostly foot soldiers of the Frateris Militia, out of the oasis town. Two of the
young psykers had been killed in the crossfire, but the others were safely
transferred into the hands of the Astropathicus.
Tantalid, fleeing Kuuma to lick his wounds, had tried to have me
declared heretic, but the charges were swiftly overturned. The Ministorum
had, at that time, no wish to court conflict with their allies in the Inquisition.
I had expected, known even, that Tantalid would return sometime to
plague me. It was a personal matter now, one which his fanatical disposition
would fix upon and transform into a holy calling.
But the last I had heard, he had been leading an ecclesiarchy mission into
the Ophidian sub-sector in support of the century-long Purge Campaign
there.
I wondered what had brought him to Lethe Eleven at so inopportune a
moment.
BY THE TIME I was back on my feet, two weeks later, the Darknight was
over and I knew the answer, in general if not specific terms.
I was hobbling around on a cane in the private mansion I had rented in
Lethe Majeure when Aemos brought me the news. The great Ophidian
Campaign was over.
‘Great success,’ he announced. ‘The last action took place at Dolsene
four months ago, and the Warmaster has declared the sub-sector cleansed. A
famous victory, don’t you think?’
‘Yes. I should hope so. It’s taken them long enough.’
‘Gregor, Gregor... even with a force as large as the hallowed Battlefleet
Scarus, the subjugation of a sub-sector is an immense task! That it took the
best part of a century is nothing! The pacification of the Extempus sub-
sector took four hundred y—’
He paused.
‘You’re toying with me, aren’t you?’
I nodded. He was very easy to wind up.
Aemos shook his head and eased his ancient body down into one of the
leather chairs.
‘Martial law still dominates, I understand, and caretaker governments
have been established on the key worlds. But the Warmaster himself is
returning with the bulk of the fleet in triumph, setting foot in this sub-sector
again for the first time in a hundred years.’
I stood by the open windows, looking out from the mansion’s first floor
across the grey roofs of Lethe Majeure which seemed to coat the hills of the
Tito Basin like the scaled hide of some prehistoric reptile. The sky was a
magnolia haze, and a light breeze breathed. It was almost impossible now to
picture this place beset by the filthy, permanent shadows of the Darknight.
Now, perhaps, I knew why Tantalid had returned. The Ophidian war was
over, and his holy mission concluded with it.
‘I remember them setting out, don’t you?’ I asked.
A foolish question. My savant was a data-addict, driven since the age of
forty-two standard to collect and retain all manner of information thanks to
a meme-virus he had contracted. There was no possibility of him forgetting
anything. He scratched the side of his hooked nose where his heavy
augmetic eye-pieces touched.
‘How could either of us forget that?’ he replied. ‘The summer of 240.
Hunting the Glaw clan on Gudrun during the very Founding itself.’
Indeed, we had played a particular role in delaying the start of the
Ophidian Campaign. The Warmaster, or lord militant as he had been back
then, had been all but set to launch his purge into Ophidian space when my
investigation of the heretic Glaw family had triggered a mass uprising later
known as the Helican Schism. To his great surprise and displeasure, the
Warmaster had been abruptly forced to redirect his readied forces in a
pacification of his very own sub-sector.
Warmaster Honorius. Honorius Magnus they were calling him. I had
never met him, nor had I much wish to. A brutal man, as are so many of his
kind. It takes a special mindset, a special brutality, to crush planets and
populations.
‘There is to be a great Jubilation on Thracian Primaris,’ Aemos said. ‘A
Holy Novena congregated by the Synod the High Ecclesiarchy. It is
rumoured that the Imperial Lord Commander Helican himself will attend,
specifically to bestow upon the Warmaster the rank of Feudal Protector.’
‘I’m sure he’ll be very pleased. Another heavy medallion to throw at his
officers when he’s annoyed.’
‘You’re not tempted to attend?’
I laughed. In truth, I had thought to return to the Helican sub-sector
capital before long. Thracian Primaris, the most massive, industrialised and
populated world in the sub-sector, had wrested capital planet status from
ancient Gudrun after the disgrace and foment of the Schism, finally
achieving the preeminence it felt its size and power had long deserved. It
was now the chief Imperial planet of this region.
There was work to be done, reports to be filed and presented, and those
things could best be achieved by returning to my property on Thracian, my
base of operations, near to the Palace of the Inquisition. But I had little love
for Thracian Primaris. It was an ugly place, and I only made my
headquarters there out of convenience. The thought of pomp and ceremony
and festivals filled me with quiet dread.
Perhaps I would go to Messina instead, or to the quiet of Gudrun, where I
maintained a small, comfortable estate.
‘The Inquisition is to attend in great strength. Lord Rorken himself...’
I waved a hand in Aemos’s direction. ‘Does it appeal to you?’
‘No.’
‘Are there not better uses for our time? Pressing matters? Things that
would be more easily achieved away from such overblown distractions?’
‘Most certainly,’ he said.
‘Then I think you know my mind.’
‘I think I do, Gregor,’ he said, rising to his feet and reaching into the
pocket of his green robe. ‘And therefore I’m fully prepared for the fact that
you’re going to curse me when I give you this.’
He held out a small data-slate, an encrypted message-tile whose contents
had been received and stored by the astropaths.
The official seal of the Inquisition was stamped across its front.
THREE
Capital world.
The Ocean House.
Intruders, past and present.
THRACIAN PRIMARIS, CAPITAL world of the Helican sub-sector, seat of
government, Helican sub-sector, Scarus sector, Segmentum Obscurus. You
can read that description in any one of a hundred thousand guidebooks,
geographies, Imperial histories, pilgrimage primers, industrial ledgers, trade
directories, star maps. It sounds impressive, authoritarian, powerful.
It does no justice at all to the monster it describes.
I have known hellholes and death-planets that from space look serene and
wondrous: the watercolours of their atmospheres, the glittering moons and
belts they wear like bangles and jewels, the natural wonders that belie the
dangers they contain.
Thracian Primaris is no such dissembler. From space, it glowers like an
oozing, cataracted eye. It is corpulent, swollen, sheened in grey veils of
atmospheric soot through which the billion billion lights of the city hives
glimmer like rotting stars. It glares balefully at all ships that approach.
And, oh! But they approach! Shoals of ships, flocks of them, countless
craft, drawn to this bloated cesspit by the lure of its vast industrial wealth
and mercantile vigour.
It has no moons, no natural moons anyway. Five Ramilies-class star-forts
hang above its atmosphere, their crenellated towers and buttressed gun-
stations guarding the approaches to and from the capital world. A dedicated
guild of forty thousand skilled pilots exists simply to guide traffic in and out
of the jostling, crowded high-anchor reaches. It has a planetary defence
force, a standing army of eight million men. It has a population of twenty-
two billion, plus another billion temporary residents and visitors. Seven-
tenths of its surface are now covered by hive structures, including great
sections of the world’s original oceans. City-sprawl fills and covers the
seas, and the waters roll in darkness far beneath.
I loathe the place. I loathe the lightless streets, the noise, the press of
bodies. I loathe the stink of its re-circulated air. I loathe its airborne grease-
filth adhering to my clothes and skin.
But fate and duty bring me back there, time and again.
The encrypted Inquisitorial missive had been quite clear: I, and a great
number of my peers, was summoned to Thracian Primaris to attend the
Holy Novena, and wait upon the pleasure of the Lord Grandmaster
Inquisitor Ubertino Orsini. Orsini was the most senior officer of the
Inquisition in the entire Helican sub-sector, a status that made him equal in
rank and power to any cardinal palatine.
I was not about to decline.
THE VOYAGE FROM Lethe Eleven took a month, and I brought my entire
entourage back with me. We arrived just four days shy of the start of the
Novena. As a tiny pilot boat led my ship in to anchor through the massed
ranks of orbiting starships, I saw the dark formations of Battlefleet Scarus,
suckling at a starfort as if they were its young. This was their heroic
homecoming. There was a taste of victory in the air. An Imperial triumph
on this scale was something to be savoured, something the Ministorum
could use to boost the morale of the common citizenry.
‘YOUR ITINERARY HAS been prepared,’ said Alain von Baigg, a junior
interrogator who served as my secretary. We were aboard the gun-cutter,
dropping towards the planet.
‘Oh, by whom?’
He paused. Von Baigg was a diffident and lustreless young man who I
doubted would ever make the rank of inquisitor. I’d accepted him to my
staff in the hope that service alongside Ravenor might inspire him. It had
not.
‘I would have presumed that the preparation of my itinerary might have
included my own choices.’
Von Baigg stammered something. I took the data-slate he was holding.
The list of appointments was not his handiwork, I saw. It was an official
document, processed by the Ministorum’s nunciature in collaboration with
the Office of the Inquisition. My timetable for all nine days of the Holy
Novena was filled with audiences, acts of worship, feasts, presentation
ceremonies, unveilings and Ministorum rites. All nine days, plus the days
before and after.
I was here, damn it! I had responded to the summons. I would not allow
myself to be subjected to this round of junkets too. I took a stylus and
quickly marked the events I was prepared to attend: the formal rites, the
Inquisitorial audience, the Grand Bestowment. ‘That’s it,’ I said, tossing it
back to him. ‘The rest I’m skipping.’ Von Baigg looked uncomfortable.
‘You are expected at the Post-Apostolic Conclave immediately on arrival.’
‘Immediately on arrival,’ I told him sternly, I’m going home.’
HOME, FOR ME, was the Ocean House, a private residence I leased in the
most select quarter of Hive Seventy. On many hive worlds, the rich and
privileged dwell in districts high up in the top-most city spires, divorced as
far as possible from the dirt and crowding of the mid and low-hab levels.
But no matter how high you climbed on Thracian Primaris, there was
nothing to find but smog and pollution.
Instead, the exclusive habitats were on the underside of the hive portions
that extended out over and into the hidden seas. There was at least a
tranquillity here.
MEDEA BETANCORE FLEW the gun-cutter down through the traffic-thick
atmosphere, threaded her way between the tawdry domes, dingy towers,
rusting masts and crumbling spires, and laced into the seething lanes of air
vehicles entering a vast feeder tunnel which gave access to the hives’
arterial transit network.
Bars of blue-white light set into the walls of the huge tunnel strobed by
the ports. In under an hour we had reached a great transit hub, three
kilometres down in the city-crust, where she set the cutter down on a
massive elevator platform that sedately lowered us and a dozen other craft
into the sub-levels of Hive Seventy. The cutter was then berthed in a private
lifter-drome and we transferred to a tuberail for the final stretch to the
maritime habitats.
I was already weary of Thracian Primaris by the time I reached the Ocean
House.
BUILT FROM PLASMA-SEALED grandiorite and an adamite frame, the Ocean
House was one of a thousand estates built along the submarine wall of Hive
Seventy. It was nine kilometres beneath the city crust and another two
below sea level. A small palace by the standards of most common Imperial
citizens, it was large enough to house my entire retinue, my libraries,
armoury and training facilities, not to mention a private chapel, an audience
hall and an entire annex for Bequin’s Distaff. It was also secure, private and
quiet.
Jarat, my housekeeper, was waiting for us in the entrance hall. She was
dressed, as ever, in a pale grey gown-robe and a black lace cap draped with
a white veil. As the great iron hatch-doors cycled open, and I breathed the
cool, purified air of the house, she clapped her plump hands and sent
servitors scurrying forward to take our coats and assist with the baggage
train.
I stood for a moment on the nashemeek rug and looked around at the
austere stone walls and the high arched roof. There were no paintings, no
busts or statuary, no crossed weapons or embroidered tapestries, only an
Inquisitorial crest on the far wall over the stairs. I am not one for decoration
or opulence. I require simple comfort and functionality.
The others bustled around me. Bequin and Aemos went through to the
library. Ravenor and von Baigg issued careful instructions to the servitors
concerning some baggage items. Medea disappeared to her private room.
The others in my retinue melted away into the house.
Jarat greeted them all, and then came to me.
‘Welcome, sir,’ she said. ‘You have long been from us.’
‘Sixteen months, Jarat.’
‘The house is aired and ready. We made preparations as soon as you
signalled your intentions. We were saddened to hear of the losses.’
‘Anything to report?’
‘Security was of course double-checked prior to your arrival. There are a
number of messages.’
‘I’ll review them shortly.’
‘You are hungry, no doubt?’
She was right, though I hadn’t realised it.
‘The kitchen is preparing dinner. I took the liberty of selecting a menu
that I believe you will approve of.’
‘As ever, I have faith in your choices, Jarat. I’d like to dine on the sea
terrace, with any who would join me.’
‘I’ll see to it, sir. Welcome home.’
I BATHED, PUT on a robe of grey wool, and sat for a while alone in my
private chambers, sipping a glass of amasec and looking through the
messages and communiqués by the soft light of the lamp.
There were many, mostly recent postings from old acquaintances –
officials, fellow inquisitors, soldiers – alerting me to their arrival on the
planet and conveying respects. Few needed more than a form reply from my
secretary. To some, I penned courteous, personal responses, expressing the
hope of meeting them at some or other of the Novena’s many events.
There were three that drew my particular attention. The first was a
private, coded missive from Lord Inquisitor Phlebas Alessandro Rorken.
Rorken was the head of Ordo Xenos in the Helican sub-sector, my
immediate superior and part of the triumvirate of senior inquisitors who
answered directly to Grandmaster Orsini. Rorken wanted to see me as soon
as I was back on Thracian. I responded immediately that I would come to
him at the Palace of the Inquisition the follow morning.
The second was from my old friend and colleague, Titus Endor. It had
been a long time since I had set eyes on him. His message, uncoded, read:
‘Gregor. My greetings to you. Are you home?’
The brevity was disarming. I sent an affirmative response that was
similarly brief. Endor clearly did not want to converse in writing. I awaited
his response.
The third was also uncoded, or at least lacked electronic encryption. It
said, in Glossia: ‘Scalpel cuts quickly, eager tongues revealed. At Cadia, by
terce. Hound wishes Thorn. Thorn should be sharp.’
THE SEA TERRACE was probably the main reason I had leased the Ocean
House in the first place. It was a long, ceramite-vaulted hall with one entire
wall made of armoured glass looking into the ocean. The industrialisation
of Thracian Primaris had killed off a great part of the world’s sea-life, but at
these depths, hardy survivors such as luminous deep anglers and schools of
incandescent jellies could still be glimpsed in the emerald nocturnal glow.
The candlelit room was washed by a rippling green half-light.
Jarat’s servitors had set the long table for nine and those nine were
already taking their seats and chatting over preprandial drinks as I arrived.
Like most of them, I had dressed informally, putting on a simple black suit.
The kitchen provided steamed fubi dumplings and grilled ketelfish,
followed by seared haunches of rare, gamey orkunu, and then pear and
berry tarts with a cinnamon jus. A sturdy Gudrunite claret and sweet dessert
wine from the vineyards of Messina complemented the food perfectly. I had
forgotten the excellent qualities of the house Jarat ran for me, so far away
from the hardship of missions in the field.
Around the table with me were Aemos, Bequin, Ravenor, von Baigg, my
rubricator and scribe Aldemar Psullus, Jubal Kircher, the head of household
security, a trusted field agent called Harlon Nayl, and Thula Surskova, who
was Bequin’s chief aide with the Distaff. Medea Betancore had chosen not
to join us, but I knew the intensity of the piloting chores down through
Thracian airspace had undoubtedly worn her out.
I was pleased to see that Ravenor was present. His injuries were healing,
the physical ones at least, and though he was quiet and a little withdrawn, I
felt he was beginning to come through the shock of Arianrhod’s death.
Surskova, a short, ample woman in her forties, was quietly briefing
Bequin on the progress of the newer Distaff initiates. Aemos chuntered on
to Psullus and Nayl about the events on Lethe Eleven and they listened
intently. Psullus, enfeebled and prematurely aged by a wasting disease,
never left the Ocean House and devoted his life to the maintenance and
preservation of my extensive private libraries. If Aemos hadn’t related the
story of our last mission to him, I would have made sure I did. Such tales
were his only connection to the active process of our business and he loved
to hear them. Nayl, an ex-bounty hunter from Loki, had been injured on a
mission the year before and had not been able to join us for the Lethe
endeavour. He too lapped up Aemos’s account, asking occasional questions.
I could tell he was itching to get back to work.
Von Baigg and Kircher chatted idly about the preparations for the
Novena that were now gripping the hives of Thracian, and the security
consequences they brought. Kircher was an able man, ex-arbites, and
dependable if a little unimaginative. As dessert was served, the discussion
broadened across the table.
‘They say the Bestowment will be the making of the Warmaster,’ Nayl
said, his loaded spoon poised in front of his mouth.
‘He’s made already, I’d say,’ I retorted.
‘Nayl’s right, Gregor. I heard that too,’ said Ravenor. ‘Feudal Protector.
That’s as good as Imperial Lord Commander Helican admitting the
Warmaster is on an equal footing with him.’
‘It’s a sinecure.’
‘Not at all. It makes Honorius the favourite to become warmaster-in-chief
in the Acrotara theatre now that Warmaster Hiju is dead, and Hiju was
being groomed for a place on the Senatorum Imperialis, perhaps even to sit
amongst the High Lords of Terra.’
‘Honorius may be “Magnus”, but he’s not High Lord material,’ I
ventured.
‘After this he might be,’ said Nayl. ‘Lord Commander Helican must
think he has potential, or he wouldn’t be giving him such an almighty hand
up.’
Politics left me cold, and I seldom empathised with political ambitions. I
only studied the subject because my duties often demanded a detailed
working knowledge. Imperial Lord Commander Helican, which is to say
Jeromya Faurlitz IV of the noble Imperial family Faurlitz, was the supreme
secular authority in the Helican sub-sector, for which reason he styled
himself with the sub-sector’s name in his appellation. On paper, even the
cardinals of the Ministorium, the Grandmaster of the Inquisition, the senior
luminaries of the Administratum and the Lords Militant had to answer to
him, though as with all things in Imperial society, it was never as easy as
that. Church, state and military, woven together as one, yet constantly
inimical. In favouring Warmaster Honorius with the Bestowment, Lord
Helican was throwing his lot in with the military – an overt signal to the
other organs of government – and clearly expected the Warmaster to return
the favour when he rose to levels of government beyond those of a single
sub-sector. It was a dangerous game, and rare for so senior an official to
play openly for such an advantage, though the battle-glory that surrounded
Honorius made a perfect excuse.
And that made it a dangerous time. Somebody would want to redress that
balance. My money would be on the Ecclesiarchy, though it’s fair to say
I’m biased. However, history has shown the Church to be chronically
intolerant of losing power to the military or the state. I said as much.
‘There are many other elements,’ Aemos chuckled, accepting a refill of
dessert wine. ‘The Faurlitz line is weak and lacks both support in the
Adeptus Terra and a ready ear at the Senatorum Imperialis and the courts of
the Golden Throne. Two powerful families, the De Vensii and the
Fulvatorae, are seeking to make gains against the Faurlitz, and would take
this as an open show of defiance. Then there’s the House of Eirswald, who
see their own famous son, Lord Militant Strefon, as the only viable
replacement for Hiju. And the Augustyn dynasty, let’s not forget, who were
ousted from power when High Lord of Terra Giann Augustyn died in office
forty years ago. They’ve been trying to get back in with feverish
determination these last few years, pushing their candidate, Lord
Commander Cosimo, with almost unseemly impudence. If Nayl’s right and
the Bestowment makes Honorius a certainty as Hiju’s successor, he’d
become a direct competitor with Cosimo for the High Lord’s vacant
position.’
Down the table, Bequin yawned and caught my eye.
‘Cosimo’s never going to make it,’ Psullus put in candidly. ‘His house is
far too unpopular with the Adeptus Mechanicus, and without their consent,
however tacit, no one ever makes it to High Lord rank. Besides, the
Ministorum would block it. Giann Augustyn made no friends there with his
reforms. They say it was a Callidus of the Officio Assassinorum, under
orders from the Ecclesiarchy, that took old Giann off, not a stroke at all.’
‘Careful what you say, old friend, or they’ll be sending one after you,’
Ravenor said. Psullus held up his bony hands in a dismissive gesture as
laughter rippled around the table.
‘It is, still, most perturbatory,’ Aemos said. ‘This Bestowment could lead
to a House war. Quite apart from all the obvious opponents, Lord Helican
and the Warmaster could find themselves tasked by Imperial families who
are thus far neutral. There are many who are quite comfortable with their
situation, and who would strike with astonishing ruthlessness simply to
avoid being drawn into an open bloody clash.’
There was silence for a moment.
‘Psullus,’ said Ravenor quickly, changing the subject with a diplomat’s
deftness, ‘I have a number of works for you that I collected on Lethe,
including a palimpsest of the Analecta Phaenomena...’
Psullus engaged the young interrogator eagerly. Aemos, von Baigg and
Nayl continued to debate the Imperial intrigue. Bequin and Surskova made
their goodnights and withdrew. I took my crystal balloon of amasec to the
glass wall and looked out into the oceanic depths. Kircher joined me after a
moment. He smoothed the front of his navy blue jacket and put on his black
gloves before speaking.
‘We had intruders last month,’ he said quietly.
I looked round at him. ‘When?’
‘Three times, in fact,’ he said, ‘though I didn’t realise that until the third
occasion. During night cycle about six weeks ago, I had what seemed to be
a persistent fault on the alarms covering the seawall vents. There was no
further sign, and the servitors replaced that section of the system. Then
again, a week later, on the service entrance to the food stores, and the outer
doors of the Distaff annex, both on the same night. I suspected a system
corruption, and planned an overhaul of the entire alarm net. The following
week, I found the security code on the outer locks of the main door had
been defaulted to zero. Someone had been in and left again. I scoured the
building and found vox-thieves buried in the walls of six rooms, including
your inner chambers, and discreet farcoders wired into three
communication junction nodes, spliced to vox and pict lines. Someone had
also tried, and failed, to force their way into your void-vault, but they didn’t
know the shield codes.’
‘And there were no traces?’
‘No prints, no microspores, no follicles. I washed the air itself through
the particle scrubber. The in-house pict recorders show nothing... except a
beautifully disguised time-jump of thirty-four seconds. The astropaths
sensed nothing. In one place, the intruder must have walked across four
metres of under-floor pressure pads without setting them off. In retrospect, I
realised the two prior incidents, far from being system faults, were
experimental tests to probe, gauge and estimate our security net. Trial runs
before the actual intrusion. For that, they used a code scrambler on the main
doors. If they’d actually been able to crack it, they could have reset the code
and I’d never have known they’d been in.’
‘You’ve double-checked everything? No more bugs to be found?’
He shook his head. ‘Lord, I can only apologise for—’
I held tip a hand. ‘No need, Kircher. You’ve done your job. Show me
what they left.’
KIRCHER UNROLLED A red felt cloth across the top of a table in the quiet of
the inner library. He was nervous, and beads of sweat were trickling down
from his crest-like shock of white hair.
I hadn’t wanted to alarm anyone, so I had asked only Ravenor and
Aemos to join us. The room smelled of teak from the shelves, must from
the books, and ozone from the suspension fields sustaining especially frail
manuscripts.
The felt was laid out. On it lay nine tiny devices, six vox-thieves and
three farcoders, each one set in a pearl of solid plastic.
‘Once I’d stripped them out, I sealed them in inert gel to make sure they
were dead. None were booby trapped.’
Gideon Ravenor stepped in and picked up one of the sealed vox-thieves,
holding it up to the light.
‘Imperial,’ he said. ‘Unmarked, but Imperial. Very high grade and
advanced.’
‘I thought so too,’ said Kircher.
‘Military? Secular?’ I asked.
Ravenor shrugged. ‘We could source them to likely manufacturers, but
they likely supply all arms of the Imperium.’
Aemos’s augmetic optics clicked and turned as he peered down at the
objects on the cloth. ‘The farcoders,’ he began, ‘similarly advanced. It takes
singular skill to patch one of these successfully into a comm-node.’
‘It takes singular skill to break in like they did,’ I countered.
‘They have no maker markings, but they’re clearly refined models from
the Amplox series. Much more refined than the heavy-duty units the
military use. It’s just conjecture, but I’d say this was beyond the
Ministorum too. They’re notoriously behind when it comes to tech
advancements.’
‘Who then?’ I asked.
‘The Adeptus Mechanicus?’ he ventured. I scowled.
He shrugged, smiling. ‘Or at least a body with the power and influence to
secure such advanced devices from the Adeptus Mechanicus.’
‘Like?’
‘The Officio Assassinorum?’
‘Who would break in to kill, not listen.’
‘Noted. Then a powerful Imperial house, one with clout in the Senatorum
Imperialis.’
‘Possible...’ I admitted.
‘Or...’ he said.
‘Or?’
‘Or the one Imperial institution that regularly employs such devices and
has the prestige and determination to make sure it is using the best available
equipment.’
‘That being?’
Aemos looked at me as if I was stupid.
‘The Inquisition, of course.’
I SLEPT BADLY, fitfully. Three hours before the end of the night cycle, I sat
up in my bed, suddenly, coldly awake.
Dressed only in the sheet I had wrapped around me, I stalked out into the
hall, my grip firm on the matt-grey snub pistol that lived in a holster
secured behind my headboard.
Dim blue light filtered through the hallway, softening the edges of
everything. I crept forward.
I was not mistaken. Someone was moving about down below, in the
lower foyer.
I edged down the stairs, gun braced, willing my eyes to accustomise to
the gloom.
I thought to hit a vox and alert Kircher and his staff, but if someone was
inside, skilful enough to get past the alarms, then I wanted to capture him,
not scare him off with a full blown alert. In the few hours since I had
arrived back at the Ocean House, a nasty taste of treachery had seeped into
my world. It might be largely paranoia, but I wanted an end to it.
A beam of white light stabbed across the foyer floor from the half open
kitchen doors. I heard movement again.
I sidled to the doorframe, checked the safety was off, and slid, weapon
first, through the gap in the doors.
The outer kitchen, a realm of marble-topped workbays and scrubbed
aluminium ranges, was empty. Metal pots and utensils hung silently from
ceiling racks. There was a smell of garlic and cooked herbs in the still air.
The light was on in the inner pantry, near the cold store, and the illuminated
backwash filled the room.
Two steps, three, four. The kitchen’s stone floor was numbingly cold
under my bare feet. I reached the door to the inner pantry. There was
movement inside.
I kicked the door open and leapt inside, aiming the compact sidearm.
Medea Betancore, clad only in a long, ex-military undershirt, roared out
in surprise and dropped the tray of leftover ketelfish she had been gorging
on. The tray clattered on the tiled floor in front of the open larder.
‘Great gods alive, Eisenhorn!’ she wailed in outrage, jumping up and
down on the spot. ‘Don’t do that!’
I was angry. I didn’t immediately lower my aim. ‘What are you doing?’
‘Eating? Hello?’ She sneered at me. ‘Feel like I’ve been asleep for a
week. I’m famished.’
I began to lower the gun. A sense of embarrassment began to filter into
my wired state.
‘I’m sorry. Sorry. You should... maybe... get dressed before you come
down to raid the larder.’ It sounded stupid even as I said it. I didn’t realise
how stupid until a moment later. I was too painfully aware of her long, dark
legs and the way the singlet top was curved around the proud swell of her
bust.
‘You should take your own advice... Gregor,’ she said, raising one
eyebrow.
I looked down. I had lost the sheet kicking open the door. I was what
Midas Betancore used to call ‘very naked’.
Except, of course, for the loaded gun.
‘Damn. My apologies.’ I turned to scrabble for the fallen sheet.
‘Don’t stand on my account,’ she sniggered.
I froze, stooped. The muzzle of a Tronsvasse parabellum was pointing
directly at my head from the darkness behind me.
It lowered. Harlon Nayl looked me up and down for a moment in frank
dismay and then raised a warning finger to his lips. He was fully clothed,
damn him.
I retrieved my sheet.
‘What?’ I hissed.
‘Someone’s in. I can feel it,’ he whispered. ‘The noise you two were
making, I thought it was the intruder. Didn’t know you were so keen on
Medea.’
‘Shut up.’
The two of us fanned out back through the outer kitchen. Nayl pulled up
the hood of his vulcanised black bodyglove to cover his pale, shaved head.
He was a big man, a head taller than me, but he melted away into the
darkness. I watched carefully for his signals.
Nayl waved me left down the hall. I trusted his judgment completely. He
had stalked the galaxy’s most innovative and able scum for three decades. If
there were intruders, he’d find them.
I entered the Ocean House’s main hall, and saw the front entry was ajar.
The code display on the main lock was blinking a default of zeros.
I swung round as a gun roared behind me. I heard Nayl cry out and
sprinted back into the inner foyer. Nayl was on the floor, grappling with an
unidentifiable man.
‘Get up! Get up! I’m armed!’ I shouted.
In reply, the unknown intruder smacked Nayl’s head back against the
floor so hard he knocked him out, and then threw Nayl’s heavy sidearm at
me.
I fired, once, and blew a hole in the wall. The spinning gun clipped my
temple and knocked me over.
I heard a series of fleshy cracks and impacts, a guttural gasp and then
Medea Betancore’s voice shouting, ‘Lights up!’
I rose. She was standing astride the intruder, one hand braced in a fierce
fist, the other pulling down her undershirt for modesty.
‘I got him,’ she said, glancing round at me.
The dazed intruder was clad in black from head to foot. I wrenched off
his hood.
It was Titus Endor.
‘Gregor,’ he lisped through a bloody mouth. ‘You did say you were
home.’
FOUR
Between friends.
An interview with Lord Rorken.
The Apotropaic Congress.
‘GRAIN JOILIQ, WITH shaved ice, and a sliver of citrus.’
Seated in my sanctum chamber, Endor took the proffered drink and
grinned at me. ‘You remembered.’
‘Many were the nights, in those fine old days. Titus, I’ve mixed your
drink of choice too many times to count.’
‘Hah! I know. What was that place, the one off Zansiple Street? Where
the host used to drink the profits?’
‘The Thirsty Eagle,’ I replied. He knew full well. It was as if he was
testing me.
‘The Thirsty Eagle, that’s it! Many were the nights, as you say.’
He held up his tumbler of clear, iced spirits.
‘Raise ’em and sink ’em and let’s have another!’
I echoed the old toast and clinked my lead-crystal of vintage amasec
against his glass.
For a moment, it was indeed like the fine old days. Both of us, nineteen
years old, full of piss and promethium, newly promoted interrogators ready
to take on the whole damn galaxy, students of old Inquisitor Hapshant. Five
years later, almost simultaneously, we would both be elected full
inquisitors, and our individual careers would begin in earnest.
Nineteen years old, drunk on our feet, carousing in an armpit of a bar off
Zansiple Street after hours, mocking our illustrious mentor and bonding for
life, bonding with that unquestioning exuberance that seems to me now
only possible in youth.
It was like regarding a different life, so far away, almost unrecoverable. I
was not that Gregor Eisenhorn. And this man, with his long, braided grey
hair and scarred face, sitting in my sanctum dressed in a body-heat masking
stealth suit, was not that Titus Endor.
‘You could have called,’ I began.
‘I did.’
I shrugged. ‘You could have joined us for dinner tonight. Jarat excelled
herself again.’
‘I know. But then...’ he paused, and rattled the ice around in his drink
thoughtfully. ‘But then, it might have become known that Inquisitor Endor
had visited Inquisitor Eisenhorn.’
‘It is well known that those two are old friends. Why would that have
been a problem?’
Endor set down his drink, unpopped the fasteners around his waistband
and pulled the top half of his stealth suit up over his head. He cast the
garment aside.
‘Too hot,’ he remarked. His undershirt was dark with sweat. The jagged
saurapt tooth still hung around his neck on a black cord. That tooth. Years
ago, I’d dug it out of his leg after he had driven the beast off. Brontotaph,
twelve decades ago and more. The pair of us, alongside Hapshant, in the
mist-meres.
‘I’ve come for the Novena,’ he said. ‘I was summoned to attend by
Orsini’s staff, like you I imagine. I wanted to talk to you, talk to you as far
off the record as was possible.’
‘So you broke into my house?’
He sighed deeply, finished his drink and walked over to the spirit stand in
the corner of the room to fix another.
‘You’re in trouble,’ he said.
‘Really? Why is that?’
He looked round, peeling strips of citrus rind off a fruit with a paring
knife.
‘I don’t know. But there are rumblings.’
‘There are always rumblings.’
He turned to face me fully. His eyes were suddenly very hard and bright.
‘Take this seriously.’
‘Very well, I will.’
‘You know what the rumour-mill is like. Someone’s always got a point to
make, a score to settle. There were stories. I dismissed them at first.’
‘Stories?’
He sighed again and returned to his seat with his refreshed drink.
‘There is talk that you are... unsound.’
‘What talk?’
‘Damn it, Gregor! I’m not one of your interview suspects! I’ve come here
as a friend.’
‘A friend who broke in wearing a stealth suit and—’
‘Shut up just for a minute, would you?’
I paused.
‘Gladly. If you cut to the chase.’
‘The first I heard, someone was bad-mouthing you.’
‘Who?’
‘It doesn’t matter. I waded in and told them just what I thought. Then I
heard the story again. Eisenhorn’s unsound. He’s lost the plot.’
‘Really?’
‘Then the stories changed. It was no longer “Eisenhorn’s unsound”, it
was, “The people who matter think Eisenhorn’s unsound”. As if somehow
suspicion of you had become official.’
‘I’ve heard nothing,’ I said, sitting back.
‘Of course you haven’t. Who’d say it to your face but a friend... or a
convening judge from Internal Prosecution?’
I raised my eyebrows. ‘You’re really worried, aren’t you, Titus?’
‘Damn right. Someone’s gunning for you. Someone who’s got the ear of
the upper echelon. Your career and activities are under scrutiny.’
‘You get that all from rumours? Come on, Titus. There are plenty of
inquisitors I can think of who’d like to score points off me. Orsini’s a closet
Monodominant, and the puritan idealists are forming a power block around
him. They are radicals, in their way. You know that. Us Amalathians are too
louche for their tastes.’
I mentioned before how I hated politics. Nothing is more fruitless and
wearying than the internal politics of the Inquisition itself. My kind is
fractured internally by belief factions and intellectual sectarianism. Endor
and myself count ourselves as Amalathian inquisitors, which is to say we
hold an optimistic outlook and work to sustain the integrity of the
Imperium, believing it to be functioning according to the divine Emperor’s
scheme. We preserve the status quo. We hunt down recidivist elements:
heretics, aliens, psykers, the three key enemies of mankind – these are of
course our primary targets – but we will set ourselves against anything that
we perceive to be destabilising Imperial society, up to and including
factional infighting between the august organs of our culture. It has always
struck me as ironic that we had to become a faction in order to fight
factionalism.
We profess to be puritans, and certainly are so compared to the extreme
radical factions of the Inquisition such as the Istvaanians and the
Recongregators.
But equally alien to us are the extreme right wing of the puritan factions,
the Monodominants and the Thorians, some of whom believe even the use
of trained psykers to be heretical.
If I was in trouble, it would not be the first time an inquisitor of
tempered, moderate beliefs had run foul of either extreme in his own
organisation.
‘This goes beyond simple faction intrigue,’ Titus said quietly. ‘This isn’t
a hardliner deciding to give the moderates a going over. This is particular to
you. They have something.’
‘What?’
‘Something concrete on you.’
‘How do you know?’
‘Because twenty days ago on Messina, I was detained and questioned by
Inquisitor Osma of the Ordo Malleus.’
I suddenly realised I was up out of my seat.
‘You were what?’
He waved dismissively. ‘I’d just finished a waste-of-time matter, and was
preparing to pack up and ship for Thracian. Osma contacted me, polite and
friendly, and asked if he could meet with me. I went to see him. It was all
very civil. He made no effort to restrain me... but I don’t think I could have
left before he had finished. He was guarded, but he made it clear that if I
decided to walk out... his people would stop me.’
‘That’s outrageous!’
‘No, that’s Osma. You’ve met him surely? One of Orsini’s. Bezier’s
right-hand man. Thorian to the marrow. He makes a point of getting what
he’s after.’
‘And what did he get?’
‘From me?’ Endor laughed. ‘Not a thing, except for a glowing character
reference! He allowed me to leave after an hour. The bastard even
suggested we might meet and dine together, socially, during the Novena.’
‘Osma is a skilled operator. Slippery. So... that begs the question, what
did he want?’
‘He wanted you. He was interested in our friendship and our history. He
asked me about you, like he wanted me to let something personal and
damning slip. He didn’t give away much of anything, but it was clear he
had dirt. Some report had been filed that compromised you, directly or
indirectly. By the end of it, I knew that the rumours I had been hearing were
just the surface ripples of a secret inquiry. I knew then that I had to warn
you... without anyone knowing we’d spoken.’
‘It’s all lies,’ I told him.
‘What is?’
‘I don’t know. Whatever they think. Whatever they fear. I’ve done
nothing that deserves the attention of the Ordo Malleus.’
‘I believe you, Gregor,’ Endor said, in a way that suggested to me he
undoubtedly did not.
WE TOOK FRESH drinks onto the sea terrace. He looked out at the
kaleidoscopic swirls of luminous plankton and said, ‘They’ve only just
begun.’
I nodded and looked down at the drink cradled in my hands.
‘On Lethe... Tantalid came after me. I supposed at the time it was old
scores, but from what you’ve said tonight, I doubt that now.’
‘Be careful,’ he murmured. ‘Look, Gregor, I should go. This should have
been a better reunion of old friends.’
‘I want to thank you for the chance you took. The effort you made to
bring this to me.’
‘You’d do the same.’
‘I would. One last thing... how did you get in?’
He looked round at me sharply.
‘What?’
‘In here? Tonight?’
‘I used a code scrambler on the door.’
‘You diverted the alarms.’
‘I’m not a novice, Gregor. My scrambler was set to trigger a nulling
cascade effect through the system.’
‘That’s quite a piece of kit. May I see it?’
He took a small black pad from his hip-pocket and passed it to me.
‘An Amplox model,’ I noted. ‘Quite advanced.’
‘I only use the best.’
‘Me too. I’ve employed these before. They seem... just in my
experience... to work best after a few tests.’
‘How so?’
‘A dry run or two, I mean. To assess the system you’re trying to
penetrate. A few soft passes to gauge the security and let the scrambler
assimilate and learn what it’s up against.’
‘Yeah, I’ve done that, when I’ve had the luxury of time. These suckers
learn fast. Still, they do the job on the spot when time is tight.’
‘Like tonight?’ I handed the device back to him.
‘Yes... what do you mean?’
‘It got you in tonight from cold? No test runs necessary?’
‘No, of course not. This visit was spur of the moment. And until that
pretty bitch of yours kicked me in the face, I had thought myself very lucky
to have gotten so far.’
‘So you haven’t been here before? You haven’t been in before?’
‘No,’ he said sharply. Either I had offended him or...
‘Go if you have to,’ I said.
‘Goodnight, Gregor.’
‘Goodnight, Titus. I’d offer to show you out, but I think you know the
way well enough.’
He grinned, raised his glass and finished it in a single swig.
‘Raise ’em and sink ’em and let’s have another!’
‘I hope so,’ I replied.
THE PALACE OF the Inquisition on Thracian Primaris is high in the cloud
tiers of Hive Forty-Four. The size of a small city itself, it is the chief office
of the Inquisition in the Helican sub-sector, maintaining a permanent staff
of sixty thousand. I make no excuses for its black steatite facings, its
darkened windows, its protective spines of iron spikes. Critics of the
Inquisition may regard its architecture as almost comically overdone,
playing directly to the general public’s worst fears about the nature of the
Inquisition with its deliberate, black menace. That, I would say, is precisely
the point. Fear keeps the populace in line, fear of an institution so terrible it
will not hesitate to punish them for transgressions.
At the start of the next day cycle, I went to the Palace, escorted by
Aemos, von Baigg and Thula Surskova. Ironically, I felt vulnerable with
only three companions at my side. I had grown too used to a large retinue
these last few decades. I had to remind myself that there had been a time
when my entire retinue would have numbered three such people.
The Palace of the Inquisition is not a place for casual or accidental
meetings. Inside, it is a dark maze of shadowy halls, void screens and
opaquing fields. The staff and visitors move privately behind masking
energy fields, their business confidential. On entry to the echoing main hall,
my party was issued with a drone cyber-skull that hovered at our shoulders
and projected an insulating cone of silence around us. We were offered an
astropath adept too to further ensure our privacy, but I declined. Surskova,
with her untouchable quality, was all I needed.
The hooded Inquisitorial guards, their burgundy armour threaded with
gold leaf and emblazoned with the seal of our Office, led us across the
black marble floor, their double-handed powerblades held upright before
them. Glinting brown opaquing fields swirled into being on either side,
forming a solid, buzzing corridor of energy that divorced us from our
surroundings.
Alain von Baigg played with his high collar distractedly as we walked.
He was nervous. The oppressive threat of the palace affected even its own
servants.
LORD RORKEN AWAITED us in his private chambers. A void shield
dissipated to allow us through the circular doorway and flickered back to
life once we were inside. The guards did not accompany us. I told my trio to
wait for me in the austere vestibule where there were two cast iron benches
piled with white satin bolsters.
I went in through the inner door.
I had come wearing black, with a three-quarter cloak of dark brown
leather. My inquisitorial crest was pinned at my throat. My companions
were all formally robed too. One did not call on Master of the Ordo Xenos
in casual attire.
The reception chamber was dazzlingly bright. The walls were mirrors,
framed in ormolu gilt, and the floor was a polished cream marble.
Thousands of candles burned all around, on stands, on forked candelabras,
or simply placed directly on the floor. The mirrors reflected their glare. It
was like standing in a prism that was catching golden sunlight.
I blinked, and raised my hand to shield my eyes. I saw a hundred other
men in cloaks do the same. My reflections. Multiplied Gregor Eisenhorns,
framed by twinkling candles. I saw I looked edgy.
That would not do.
‘None may escape the penetrating glare of the Inquisition’s light,’ said a
voice.
‘For to do so means perforce they embrace the outer darkness,’ I
finished.
Rorken strode towards me. ‘You know your Catuldynas, Eisenhorn.’
‘His apophthegms please me. I have never much liked his later
allegories.’
‘Too dry?’
‘Too arch. Too mannered. For my taste, Sathescine has a superior voice.
Less... bombastic.’
Rorken smiled and took my hand. ‘So you rate poetic beauty over
content?’
‘Beauty is truth, and truth beauty.’
He raised an eyebrow. ‘What is that?’
‘A pre-Imperial fragment I once read. Anonymous. As to your first
question, I would read Sathescine over Catuldynas for pleasure, and insist
that my neophytes read Catuldynas repeatedly until they can quote it as well
as I.’
Rorken nodded. He was a compact man, his head shaved but for a short
goatee, and he wore crimson robes over black clothes and gloves. It was
impossible to guess his age, but he must have been at least three hundred
years old, for he had held his high office for a century and a half. Thanks to
augmentation and juvenatus processes, he looked like a man in his late
forties.
‘Can I offer you refreshment?’ he asked.
‘Thank you, no, sir. The nunciature has organised a busy schedule for me
through the Novena, so I would be grateful if we could deal with things
directly.’
‘The Ministorum’s nuncios have set busy schedules for us all. The Lord
Commander has charged them with arranging as much pomp as possible for
this celebration. And the Gregor Eisenhorn I know won’t be sticking to
their appointments if he can help it.’
I made no reply. That was a telling remark.
I became wary. Rorken and I had a good working relationship, and I felt
he had trusted me ever since the affair with the Necroteuch ninety-eight
years before. Since then he had been pleased to lead me, guide me, and
oversee my cases personally. But one did not become anything like friends
with the Master of the Ordo Xenos Helican.
‘Have a seat. You can spare me a little time, I think.’
We sat on high-backed chairs either side of a low table, and he gave me
chilled water imported from the chalybeate springs of Gidmos.
‘A restorative tonic. I understand the Beldame tested you hard on Lethe
Eleven.’
I slid a data-slate out of my cloak.
‘A preliminary draft of my full report,’ I said, handing it to him. He took
it and put it, unread, on the table.
‘Do you know why I have asked to see you?’
I paused, and took a calculated gamble.
‘Because of the stories that I am unsound.’
He cocked his head in interest. ‘You’ve heard them?’
‘They’ve been brought to my attention. Recently.’
‘Your reaction?’
‘In all honesty? Puzzlement. I don’t know the matter of the stories
themselves. I feel someone must have a grudge.’
‘Against you?’
‘Against me personally.’
He sipped his water. ‘Before we go any further, I must ask you... Is there
any reason, any reason at all, that you think this story has arisen?’
‘As I said, a grudge is the—’
‘No,’ he said quietly. ‘You know what I’m asking you.’
‘I’ve done nothing,’ I said.
‘I’ll take your word for that. If at a later time I discover you’re lying, or
even hiding something from me, I will... be displeased.’
‘I have done nothing,’ I repeated.
He steepled his hands and looked out across the sea of candles. ‘Here is
the way of it. An inquisitor – who, it does not matter – reported to me in
confidence a disturbing encounter. A daemonhost made a show of sparing a
man’s life, because it thought he was you.’
I was fascinated and horrified at the thought.
‘I am not able to confirm it, but the daemonhost has been identified as
Cherubael.’
Now my blood ran cold. Cherubael.
‘You’ve had no contact with that entity since 56-Izar?’
I shook my head. ‘No, sir. And that was almost a century ago.’
‘But you’ve been looking for it ever since?’
‘I’ve made no secret of that, sir. Cherubael is the agency of an invisible
enemy, one whose machinations involved even a member of our Office.’
‘Molitor.’
‘Yes, Konrad Molitor. I have spent a great deal of time and effort trying
to uncover the truth about Cherubael and its unseen master, but it has been
fruitless. Ten decades, and only the barest few hints.’
‘The matter of Cherubael’s involvement in the Necroteuch affair was
passed to the Ordo Malleus, as you know. They too have failed to turn up a
trace of it.’
‘Where was this alleged encounter?’
He paused. ‘Vogel Passionata.’
‘And it thought it was sparing me?’
‘The implication was the daemonhost had better things in mind for you.
There was a strong suggestion of... a compact between you and it.’
‘Nonsense!’
‘I hope so—’
‘Really, nonsense, sir!’
‘I hope so, Eisenhorn. Grandmaster Orsini has no time for radical
elements in the Inquisition. Even if he wasn’t so hardline, I’d not stand for
it. Ordo Xenos Helican has no place for those who consort with Chaos.’
‘I understand.’
‘Make sure you do,’ Rorken’s face was dark and stern now. ‘Your search
for this entity continues?’
‘Even now I have agents in the field hunting for it.’
‘With any signs of success?’
I thought of the Glossia-coded message I had received the night before.
‘No,’ I said, my first and only lie in the conversation.
‘The inquisitor in question urged me to take the matter to the Ordo
Malleus. I’ll not throw one of my best men to the mercy of Bezier’s dogs. I
kept the matter internal to our ordo.’
‘Then why the stories?’
‘That’s what troubled me too. Word has got out anyway. I thought it
prudent to advise you that the Ordo Malleus might be scrutinising you.’
A second warning in twelve hours.
‘I’d like to suggest you leave Thracian and get on with other work until
the matter blows over,’ he said. ‘But your presence is required for the
Apotropaic Congress.’
PIECES NOW FELL into place. The sheer scale of the triumph celebrations,
the magnitude of the Novena, were appropriate enough, but the number of
senior inquisitors summoned to attend was heavy handed to say the least.
Military and Ecclesiarch luminaries may be ordered around to swell such
events, but inquisitors are a different breed, more aloof, more...
independent. It is unusual for us to be called together in any great gathering,
particularly by such incontestable orders. I had presumed Orsini was
throwing his weight around to impress the Lord Commander Helican.
But that was not the case. There was to be an Apotropaic Congress. That
is why we had been called here.
Apotropaic studies are conducted all the time by the Inquisition, and
usually involve one or perhaps as many as three inquisitors. On a larger
scale, they are named Councils, and require a quorum of at least eleven
inquisitors. Larger than that, they become a Congress. Such assemblies are
extremely rare. I knew for a fact that my late master Hapshant had served
on the last such Congress held in the sub-sector. That was two hundred and
seventy-nine years in the past.
The purpose of these studies, even at their smallest level, is the acute
examination and assessment of unusually valuable captives. Once in the
custody of the Inquisition, a rogue psyker, a charismatic heretic, an alien
warlord... whatever... undergoes a sometimes lengthy formal examination
quite separate from the dissection of his or her actual crimes. They are often
already condemned and only waiting for sentence to be carried out. At that
stage, the Inquisition wishes to expand its own learning, to understand more
precisely the nature of the enemies of mankind. The subjects are dissected,
usually intellectually, sometimes psychically and occasionally literally, in
order to discover their strengths, weaknesses, beliefs and drives. Vital truths
have in this way been discovered by Apotropaic councils, truths that have
armoured the servants of the Imperium for later clashes. To illustrate, the
Imperial Guard’s famous victory over the Ezzel meta-breed was only
successful thanks to methods of detecting their presence discovered by the
examination of an Ezzel scoutform by the Apotropaic Council of Adiemus
Ultima in 883.M40.
The size of the inquiry depends on the number or magnitude of the
subject.
‘Thirty-three heretic psykers of level alpha or above were captured by the
Warmaster at Dolsene, during the final major engagement of the Ophidian
Suppression,’ Rorken told me, showing me a data-slate. The security
clearance on the slate was so high that even I was impressed. ‘Trained,
somehow, to control and master the warp-spawned filth they channel, they
formed the backbone of the Enemy’s high command defence, the beating
heart of the adversary.’
‘How were they taken? Alive, I mean?’ It was astonishing. Untrained
psykers are terrifying enough, their minds always carrying the horrendous
potential to open up a gate into the immaterium, to let its daemons flood
through into our universe. But these... these fiends, they had somehow
learnt – or been trained – to focus their warp-spawned talents, to contain the
daemons within themselves and use their damnable strength. My mind
reeled at the threat they had posed, and posed still, though they were our
prisoners.
Rorken gestured to the slate in my hands. ‘You’ll find a summary of the
incident there, appended to the main list. In brief, it was luck... luck, and the
amazing courage of the Adeptus Astartes, working in conjunction with
Inquisitors Heldane, Lyko and Voke.’
‘Voke... Commodus Voke.’
‘I forgot, you’re old friends, aren’t you? He was involved with the Glaw
affair on Gudrun, just before the Schism.’
‘Old friends is probably pushing it. We worked together. We generated a
mutual respect. I’ve seen him infrequently since then. I’m amazed the old
dog is still alive.’
‘Alive, despite the prognoses of several generations of medicae experts.
And still powerful. To achieve this, in his twilight years...’
I nodded. Even a speed-reading of the incident suggested an act of near
mythical valour. Voke’s service to the Emperor was, as ever, above and
beyond any reasonable expectation of duty.
‘I know Heldane too. He was Voke’s pupil. So he’s finally made it to
inquisitor rank too?’
‘For sixty years now... Eisenhorn, you lead a solitary life, don’t you?’
‘If you mean I don’t keep up with the comings and goings of elections
and the businesses of other inquisitors, sir, yes. I do. I focus on my work,
and the needs of my staff.’
He smiled, as if indulging me. In truth, my attitude was not uncommon.
As I have said, we of the Inquisition are an aloof, independent kind, and
have little interest in the affairs of our colleagues. I saw another difference
between myself and Rorken. Whatever my seniority, I was still an agent of
the field, a worker, an achiever, who might be gone into the distant gulfs of
the Halo Stars for months or even years at a time. His rank tied him to his
palace, and wrapped him in the intrigues and mechanisms of the Imperial
ruling classes in general and the Inquisition in particular.
I remembered Commodus Voke as a poisonous old viper, but a
determined ally. During the affair of the Necroteuch, believing himself to be
on his deathbed, he had implored me to stand reference for his pupil
Heldane. I had promised him that, though when Voke then proceeded to
stay alive, I had never followed it through. He had been around to see that
Heldane got his rosette.
Heldane... I had never liked him at all.
I’d never met Lyko, the third member of the glorious trio, but I knew him
by reputation as an inquisitor whose star was very much in the ascendant.
Their spectacular achievement on Dolsene would further all their careers
magnificently.
I read through the list of inquisitors summoned to form the Council, a list
which included my name. There were sixty in all. Titus Endor was amongst
them. So was Osma, and so was Bezier. Some names, like Schongard, Hand
and Reiker, leapt out as men I had little wish to be in the same room with.
Others – Endor, naturally, and Shilo, Defay and Cuvier – were individuals it
would be a pleasure to see again.
Some names I’d barely heard of, or never heard of at all; others were
famous or infamous inquisitors who I knew only by reputation. It was quite
an assembly, drawn from all over the sector.
‘My inclusion on this list?’ I began.
‘Is no surprise. You are a senior and respected member of our office.’
‘Thank you, sir. But I wonder, did Voke request me personally?’
‘He was going to,’ Rorken told me, ‘but you had already been
nominated.’
‘By whom?’
‘Inquisitor Osma,’ he replied.
FIVE
The Triumph.
At the Spatian Gate.
The line breaks.
FOR ALL MY condemnations of the overzealous pageantry of the Novena,
I will admit that the Great Triumph of the first day filled me with a sense of
pride and exhilaration.
Across Hive Primaris, the largest and most powerful hive on Thracian,
dawn brought a chorus of klaxons and a cacophony of bells. Ministorum
services, relayed live from the Monument of the Ecclesiarch, were
broadcast on every crackling pict channel and public vox service. The
phlegmy intonations of Cardinal Palatine Anderucias rolled across the street
levels of the great hive city, overlapping like some gigantic choral round
due to the echoes of doppler distortion.
Civilians and pilgrims flooded into the streets of Hive Primaris in their
millions, clogging the arterial routes and feeder tunnels, and blackening the
sky with their craft. Many were turned back to surrounding hives to watch
the proceedings on vast hololithic screens raised in stadiums and
amphitheatres for the event.
The arbites struggled to control the flow of people and keep the route of
the Triumph clear.
The day cycle began brightly. In the night, flocks of dirigibles from the
Officium Meteorologicus had seeded the smog fields and upper cloud levels
with carbon black and other chemical precipitants. Before dawn, sixteen
hundred-kilometre wide rainstorms had washed the clouds away and
drenched the primary hives, sluicing the dirt and grime away. For the first
time in decades, the sky was clear. Not blue exactly, but clear of yellow
pollution banks. The sun’s light permeated the atmosphere and the steepled
ridges and high towers of the hives glowed. I had heard, from informal
sources, that this radical act of weather control would have profound ill
consequences for the planet’s already brutalised climate for decades to
come. Reactive hurricane storms were expected in the southern regions
before the week was out, and the drainage system of the primary hives was
said to be choked to bursting by the singular rainfall.
It was also said that the seas would die quicker, thanks to the overdose of
pollutants hosed into them so suddenly by the rain-clearance.
But the Lord Commander Helican had insisted that the sun shone on his
victory parade.
I ARRIVED EARLY to take my place, fearing the great flow of traffic into
the hive. I brought Ravenor with me. We were both dressed in our finest
garb, emblems proudly displayed, and wore ceremonial weapons.
Medea Betancore flew us in, and landed us at a reserved navy air-station
just south of the Imperial armour depot. By the time she’d got us on the
ground, the air routes were so thick she had no choice but to stay put there
for the day. There was no flying out. She bade us a good day, and strolled
away across the pad to chat with the ground crew servicing a Marauder.
A private car, arranged by the Nunciature, took Ravenor and myself to
the hive’s old Founding Fields at Lempenor Avenue, where the Inquisition
was expected to gather to join the march. Outside the windows of the
speeding lifter limousine, we saw steam rising from the empty, rain-washed
streets. Despite his best efforts, the Lord Commander Helican would have
clouds before noon.
I leant forward in the car’s passenger bay and straightened Ravenor’s
interrogator rosette. He looked nervous, a look I didn’t associate with him.
He also looked the very image of an inquisitor. I realised he didn’t look
nervous so much as just very young. Like a man hurrying to join his
drinking friends in the Thirsty Eagle off Zansiple Street.
‘What is it?’ he asked, smiling.
I shook my head. ‘This will be quite a day, Gideon. Are you ready for it?’
‘Absolutely,’ he said.
I noticed he had added the tribe badge of clan Esw Sweydyr to the
decoration of his uniform.
‘An appropriate touch,’ I remarked, pointing to it.
‘I thought so,’ he said.
AT TEN, THE Triumph began. A deafening roar of hooters and sirens
blasted across the hive, followed by a mass cheer that quite took my breath
away. By then, the streets were packed with close on two billion jubilant
citizens. Two billion voices, raised as one. You cannot imagine it.
IN SUNLIT AIR vibrating with colossal cheering, the Great Triumph moved
out from the Armour depot. It was to follow an eighteen kilometre route
straight down the kilometre-wide Avenue of the Victor Bellum, right into
the heart of the hive and the Monument of the Ecclesiarch. Millions lined
the way, cheering, applauding, waving banners and Imperial flags.
At the front rolled eighty tanks of the Thracian Fifth, pennants quivering
from their aerial masts. Behind them, the colours band of the Fiftieth
Gudrunite Rifles, pumped out the stately March of the Primarchs.
Next, the standard bearers: five hundred men carrying aloft the many
regimental guidons and emblems representing the units and regiments that
had participated in the Ophidian Suppression. It took an hour for them alone
to all pass.
On their heels came the Great Standard of the Emperor, a vast aquila
symbol like a clipper’s mainsail, so big it took a stocky, lumbering,
unbelievably ancient dreadnought of the White Consuls to lift it and stop it
being carried away by the wind. The dreadnought was escorted by five
Baneblade super-heavy tanks.
Behind that, rolled the dead. Every Imperial corpse recovered from the
closing stages of the war, loaded in state into fifteen hundred Rhino carriers
painted black for the duty. One hundred mighty Space Marines of the
Aurora Chapter marched beside the trundling machines, holding up black-
ribboned placards on which the names of the dead were etched in gold leaf.
It was noon by the time the marching ranks of the rest of Aurora Chapter,
all in full, polished imperator armour, moved by. The massive cheering had
not yet diminished. After the Space Marines came sixty thousand Thracian
troops, thirty thousand from Gudrun, eight thousand from Messina, four
thousand from Samater. Breastplates and lances glittered in the sun. Then
the navy officers from Battlefleet Scarus in neat echelons. Then the White
Consuls, glittering and terrifying.
Then the endless files of the Munitorium and the Administratum,
followed by the slow-moving trains of the Astropathicus. A dull psychic
discharge, like corposant, slithered and crackled around their carriages and
their heads, and left a metallic taste in the air.
The titans of the Adeptus Mechanicus followed them. Four Warlords,
blotting out the sun, eight grinding Warhounds, and a massive Super-Titan
called Imperius Volcanus. It was as if significant sections of the hive itself
had detached and begun walking. The vast crowds hushed as they thumped
past; man-shaped mechanisms as tall as a steeple, taller yet in the case of
Volcanus. Their massive legs rose and fell in perfect synchronisation. The
ground shook. Unperturbed, six hundred tech-priests and magos of the
Adeptus paraded casually between their feet.
The tank brigades of the Narmenians and the Scuterans followed the god-
machines. Five thousand armour units, rolling forward under a haze of
exhaust, barrels raised in salute. Tractors towed Earthshaker cannons
behind them, three abreast, and then a seemingly endless flow of Hydra
batteries, traversing their multiple barrels from left to right, like sun-
following flowers.
The Ecclesiarchy followed, led by Cardinal Rouchefor, who rode ahead
of his two thousand hierarchs barefoot. Cardinal Palatine Anderucias
awaited us all for the blessing at the monument.
From its muster point at the old Founding Fields, the Inquisition fell in
line behind the priesthood, six hundred strong.
We were the only part of the Triumph not to march in ordered ranks. We
simply strode behind the Ecclesiarch in a sombre wedge. We were not
uniform. All manner of men and women filled our ranks, all manner of
appearances and aspects. Individuals walking, dressed in dark robes or
leather capes, some with great entourages holding up the trains of gaudy
robes, some on lifter thrones, some alone and dignified, some even hidden
by personal void shields. Ravenor and I walked together in the press,
behind the extravagant ensemble of Inquisitor Eudora.
Lord Orsini, the grandmaster, led us, his long purple vestments trained
out behind him and supported by thirty servitors. At his side strode Lord
Rorken of the Ordo Xenos, Lord Bezier of the Ordo Malleus and Lord
Sakarof of the Ordo Hereticus, Orsini’s triumvirate.
Sonic booms sounded over the hives as honour escorts of Thunderhawks
flashed down above us. Fireworks banged and fizzed, staining the sky with
quick blooms of colour and light.
At our backs came the triumphal procession of the Warmaster himself.
Honorius rode with Lord Commander Helican, standing in a howdah built
upon the humped back of the largest and most venerable aurochothere
warbeast. Ten thousand men from their personal retinues marched together.
Two hundred grunting, snuffling behemoths from the aurochothere cavalry.
Eight hundred Conqueror tanks. Lifter bikes skimmed alongside their line.
The frenzied crowd strewed thousands of flowers in their path.
Behind them all came the prisoners.
Like the honoured dead in the funereal Rhinos, the prisoners were an
open show of Imperial heroism in general, and the Warmaster’s heroism in
particular. Honorius delighted in displaying their torment to the adoring
populace. The sight of these great, potent creatures cowed and submissive
made his own power manifest.
There were several hundred foot soldiers, chained together at the hands
and feet, shambling along in two wretched lines. Veterans of the Thracian
Guard marched around them, lashing out with force-poles and neural-whips
to drive them on. The crowd booed and howled, and pelted the subjugated
foe with bottles and rocks.
Six Trojan tank-tractors, painted in the Warmaster’s colours and teamed
together like horses pulling a state landau, came behind the chained
prisoners, towing a vast flatbed trailer designed to transport a super-heavy
tank. On the flatbed, shackled in adamite and encased in individual void
shield bubbles, were the thirty-three psykers, the greatest trophies of all.
They were dim, contorted shapes, barely human, swimming in the milky
green cocoons of the imprisoning shields. Along with the White Consuls
guarding the tractor-team, two hundred astrotelepaths strode alongside it,
mentally reinforcing the void bubbles that were damping the psychic fury of
the captives. Frost coated the metal of the flatbed. More psychic ball-
lightning drifted overhead.
Twenty thousand men and five hundred armoured machines of the
Thracian Interior Guard formed the tail of the Great Triumph, marching
under the dual standard of Thracia and the Warmaster.
After barely fifteen minutes of walking in the immense procession, I was
utterly numb. The noise of the crowd alone vibrated me to the very marrow.
My diaphragm shook every time the flypast came in low or when the great
siege sirens of the titans blasted. The scale of the occasion was
overwhelming, the sensory assault bewildering. Seldom have I been so in
awe of the power of my species.
Seldom have I been so forcibly reminded of my place as a tiny cog in the
workings of the holy Imperium of Mankind.
FOLLOWING THE MIGHTY Avenue of the Victor Bellum, the Triumph
passed under the Spatian Gate, a monolithic structure of glossy white
aethercite. The memorial gate was so cyclopean, even the Titans passed
under it without difficulty.
It had been raised to commemorate Admiral Lorpal Spatian, who had
been killed in the early years of the Ophidian Suppression during the
magnificent fleet action that had taken Uritule IV.
The inner part of the arch was painted with majestic murals depicting that
event, and rose to a dome so high, a microclimate of clouds regularly
formed under the apex. I had known Spatian personally, and like several
others in the procession, I paused under the giant gate to pay my respects to
the eternal flame.
No, that is not true. I had known Spatian, during the Helican Schism, but
not at all well. For reasons I could not explain, I felt compelled to stop. I
certainly had no great urge to honour him.
‘Sir?’ Ravenor asked as I stepped aside.
‘Go on, I’ll catch up shortly,’ I told him.
Ravenor moved on with the procession while I lit a votive candle and set
it amongst the thousands of others around Spatian’s tomb. The vast tide of
the Triumph moved slowly by behind me. Other figures had detached
themselves from the procession and stood nearby, paying silent homage to
the admiral.
‘Eisenhorn?’
I looked round, the voice breaking my reverie. An elderly but powerful
navy officer stood before me, splendidly austere in his white dress jacket.
‘Madorthene,’ I said, recognising him at once.
We shook hands. It had been a few years since I’d seen Olm Madorthene
– Lord Procurator Madorthene, as he was now. We’d first met at Gudrun
during the Necroteuch affair when he had been a mid-ranking officer in the
Battlefleet Disciplinary Detachment, the navy’s military police. Now he ran
that detachment. He’d been a useful and reliable ally over the years.
‘Quite an event,’ he said, with a reserved smile. Outside, the horns of the
immense Titans blared again and the noise from the crowd swelled.
‘I find myself sufficiently humbled,’ I said. ‘The Warmaster must be
loving it.’
He nodded. ‘Uplifting, good for public morale.’
I agreed, but in truth my heart was not in it. It wasn’t just the
overwhelming cacophony of it, or my deep-seated reluctance to be here at
all. Since Ravenor and I had stepped out to take our place in the Triumph, I
had nursed a sense of foreboding that was growing with each passing
minute. Was that what had made me pause here, under the great arch?
‘There’s a look on your face,’ said Madorthene. This isn’t really your
thing, is it?’
‘I suppose not.’
‘What is it, old friend?’
I paused. Something...
I strode back to the south arch of the Spatian Gate and looked back down
the huge river of the Triumph. Madorthene was with me. The Warmaster’s
retinue was just then beginning to pass under the Gate. Cymbals and horns
clashed and blared. The noise of the crowd boomed in like a tidal wave
surging down.
There were petals in the air. I remember that clearly. A blizzard of loose
petals gusting up from the flowers the crowd was strewing.
A formation of twelve Lightnings was swooping in low from the south,
coming down the length of the Triumph parade, following the Avenue of
the Victor Bellum. Coming towards the Gate. They were in line abreast, the
tips of their forward-swept wings almost touching. A display of perfect
formation flying from the Battlefleet’s best pilots. Sunlight glinted on their
canopies and on the raked double-vanes of their tailplanes.
The sense of foreboding I had felt now became oppressively real. It was
like heavy clouds had passed in front of the sun.
‘Olm, I—’
‘Emperor’s mercy! He’s in trouble, look!’ Madorthene cried.
The fighters were half a kilometre from the Gate, moving at a high
cruising speed. The left hand wingman suddenly wobbled, bucked...
...and veered.
The flier directly inside of him pulled hard to avoid a collision, and his
starboard wing clipped the wingtip of the next Lightning in line. There was
a bright puff of impact debris.
One by one, like pearls coming off a necklace, each aircraft was knocked
out of the formation. The once-sleek line broke in utter disarray.
Madorthene hurled me to the ground as the jets shrieked overhead,
rattling the world with their afterburners.
The two that I had seen strike each other were spinning in the air,
somersaulting like discarded toys, splintering trails of metal scrap behind
them. In the confusion, it seemed to me as if several others had also
accidentally collided.
One Lightning, over ten tonnes of almost supersonic metal, cartwheeled
down and went into the crowd on the west side of the Avenue. It bounced at
least once, showering human debris into the air. At its final impact, it
became a massive fireball that belched up a blazing mushroom cloud a
hundred metres into the air. Shock and berserk panic filled the crowd. The
stench of flame and heat and promethium washed over me.
There was a flash and the ground shook as a second stricken Lightning
spiralled in under the shadow the Gate. Then, almost simultaneously, a third
and louder blast came as a third aircraft, sent lurching out of control,
sheared off a wing on the top corner of the Spatian Gate itself, right above
us, and began tumbling down, end over end.
In the face of this calamitous accident, the soldiers in the Triumph were
scattering in all directions. I dragged Madorthene back in under the arch as
shattered chunks of the stricken aircraft avalanched down.
A catastrophe. A terrible, terrible catastrophe.
And it was just beginning.
SIX
Doom comes to Thracian.
Chaos unslipped.
Headshot.
EVEN AT THAT stage, gripped by horror and outrage, I knew that a great
hollow part of me deep in my soul could not, would not believe that this
had simply been a tragic accident.
There were fire and explosions all around, mass panic, screaming.
And another sound. An extraordinary low moaning, a swelling, surging
susurration that I realised was the sound two billion people make when they
are panicking and in fear for their lives.
The crowds had spilled over onto the Avenue, quite beyond the measure
of the arbites to contain them, fleeing both the dreadful crash sites and the
fires, and also the imagined risk that to stand still somehow invited more
Imperial warcraft to fall upon their heads.
The crowd moved as one, a fluid thing, like water. There was no decision
making process, no ringleader. Mass instinct simply compelled the people
who swamped the vast street, in awful, trampling tides, overwhelming the
ranks of the Triumph, much of which was already breaking up in shocked
dismay. There was no sound of music any more, no cheering, no drums or
sirens. Just a braying insanity, a world turned on its head.
I saw people die in their hundreds, trampled underfoot or crushed in the
sheer press of bodies. In some cases, the dead were so squeezed by their
neighbours, they were carried along for many metres before being freed to
slither to the ground.
I saw troopers from the retinues, and arbites, firing into the crowd in
terror before they were run down. Barricades collapsed. Standards swayed
and toppled. Walkways over the drain canals alongside the Avenue cracked
and fell in, spilling hundreds down into the rockcrete trenches.
I’d lost sight of Madorthene in the pandemonium. I tried to push out from
the arch into the sunlight, but fleeing bodies slammed into me. The entire
approach to the Spatian Gate was a mass of twisted wreckage and fire from
the impact high above. Several dozen guardsmen lay twisted and dead amid
the wreckage, killed by falling metal and stone, their dress uniforms dusted
white with powdered aethercite or scorched by fire.
Through the sea of screaming humanity, I could see several of the
massive aurochotheres stampeding out of control, rearing up, shaking their
riders from their backs, trampling into the multitude. Lifeless bodies were
tossed high into the air by their swishing tails.
I managed to slide along the outer edge of the gate until I could look
north, towards the distant Monument of the Ecclesiarch. Right along the
wide Avenue, the scene was repeated. The procession of the Triumph was
overrun by the sheer numbers of the terrified public.
There was fire too, great plumes of it, rising from the crowd spaces on
either side of the road in three places and on the Avenue of the Victor
Bellum itself, about seven hundred metres beyond the Gate. It also seemed
to me that fire also rose from other open areas beyond the next spire, off the
roadway into the artisans’ quarter. By my estimation, at least five more of
the stricken Lightnings had fallen from the sky, ripping into the mass of the
citizenry teeming in panic on the Avenue.
Soot and ash fogged the air. Distantly, above the milling nightmare of
bodies, I could see the vast shapes of the Titans, turning on their metal hips,
hesitant, as if utterly confused.
I doubt I saw the other Lightnings before anyone else. But I was
transfixed. They were all I could see. There were four more of them,
presumably the only survivors of the disastrous flyby. They had turned, and
were sweeping back down the Avenue. Their formation was nothing like as
precise or pretty as it had been just before the accident.
But they were much lower. And much faster.
And I knew what that meant, for I had seen it before.
An attack run.
Emperor spare me, my heart almost stopped as I saw the insane intention
taking shape before me.
I screamed out something, but it was futile. One voice against two
billion.
Streams of tracer rounds spat from the heavy cannons under their noses.
Wing-mounted lascannons sparkled soundlessly.
Two went low over the crowd, slaughtering thousands. The other two
followed the Avenue itself, raking the Great Triumph.
The destruction was extraordinary, as if invisible, white-hot ploughs had
been set into the sea of bodies, slicing long, straight, explosive furrows out
of the Imperial citizenry below. Or as if some fast-moving, burrowing force
was scattering them from below. Stippled lines of explosions sawed through
the populace, casting up both human and mechanical wreckage. There was
an actual fog of liquefied tissue in the air. I saw tanks struck on the
highway, detonating in the mob. Hundreds of Guardsmen and Space
Marines in the rained cavalcade opened fire into the air, chasing the planes,
churning the sky with bright, criss-crossed lines.
A Lightning swept by almost overhead, cutting to the left of the Spatian
Gate. Its strafing firepower explosively mangled hundreds of people
perilously close to me, showering me and the white stone of the Gate’s side
face with cooked blood.
Hundreds of batteries in the procession were now firing into the sky, the
Hydras blitzing the air. Even tanks were firing – out of anger, I suppose, for
they hadn’t a hope in hell of hitting the fast-moving aircraft.
Yet something must have struck. A second Lightning tilted as it passed
over the Gate, tiny explosions shredding its left wing and tail section. It
dove straight down into the Avenue itself. It hit what seemed to me to be the
heart of the Warmaster’s section of the Triumph. The blast wake blew out
across the wide roadway, killing as many with its concussive effects as with
the impact fireball itself.
The three remaining Lightnings banked again down over the far end of
the Avenue and made for a third pass. I was struck by the way they didn’t
turn as a pack. They flew individually, as if divorced from the world. Were
their pilots possessed, insane? My mind span. Two of them banked into
each other and almost hit. One didn’t veer, and carried on up the Avenue,
hungry for more carnage. The other was forced to swing wide, corrected,
and turned over the wailing crowd mass to the west of the Avenue.
The third overshot and almost disappeared. I saw it loop faraway, out
over the river haze, its wings glinting in the sun. Then it too came back for
us. Like the others, straight back heedlessly into the teeth of the firestorms
that the tanks, Hydras and infantry were throwing up at them.
Several hundreds more died in that final run. Loyal citizens whose
exciting day out had turned to horror; proud Guardsmen back from the war,
thinking only to enjoy this special hour of praise; mysterious Space
Marines, who were there only because they had been invited to be there, as
an expression of honour, who perhaps greeted this death as just an
alternative to their expected fate. Imperial nobles and dignitaries died in
their hundreds. Several noble households never recovered from the losses at
the Triumph of Thracian.
The last three Lightnings fell in this manner.
One, crossing the Spatian Gate and beyond, was blown apart in an air-
burst by tracking Hydras on the chaotic street.
A second flew the gauntlet of anti-air salvos without adjusting its height
and then, struck by one of the guns almost as an afterthought, turned upside
down in a lazy yaw. Streaming smoke, it tilted down towards the ground but
exploded against the Monument of the Ecclesiarch.
The third came in, guns chattering, and actually flew under the arch of
the Spatian Gate. By then, the Titans themselves had turned to engage, and
my guts convulsed with the subsonic roar of their weapons. I could see
them, three kilometres away, weapon mounts pumping and flashing, high
above the crowd.
Excelsis Gaude, one of the Warlord Titans, caught it dead on, and killed
it in the air, but not cleanly enough. The tumbling Lightning, ablaze from
end to end, hit the immense Warlord Titan square on and decapitated the
colossus as it exploded.
I was lost. I was stupefied. I was speechless.
I felt as if I should fall to my knees amid the tumult and beg the God-
Emperor of Mankind for salvation.
But my part in this was only just beginning.
Pellucid blue flame, like a searing wall of acid, suddenly washed through
the churning mob behind the Gate. Men, women, soldiers, civilians, were
caught in it and shuddered, melting, resolving into skeletons that turned to
dust and blew away.
I felt the pain in my sinuses, the throb in my spine. I knew what it was.
Psyker-evil. Raw Chaos, loosed on this world.
The prisoners were loose.
The warriors did not matter. A vast pitched battle was already raging
across the Avenue behind Spatian’s broken Gate. The Thracian Guard, the
Aurora Marines and the arbites were striving to contain the outbreak of
enemy prisoners, many of whom had taken the opportunity to break free
and grab weapons. A ferocious, point-blank war had seized the great
approach.
But what concerned me were the psykers. The captured heretics. The
thirty-three. They had broken free.
I drew my power sword and my boltgun, plunging into the milling
bodies, crunching over the calcified bones of those slaughtered by the
psychic wave.
An inhuman thing, a Chaos prisoner, leapt at me, and I struck its head off
with my blade. I leapt over a dead Marine, who was leaking blood onto the
rockcrete from splits in his imperator armour, and pushed through the
howling civilians.
Four Thracian Guardsmen were directly ahead of me, using the charred
corpse of a fallen aurochothere for cover as they blasted into the press.
I was a few steps away from them when the gigantic dead animal
reanimated, a psychic puppet, killing them all.
My weapons were useless. I focussed my mind and blew the thing apart
with a concussive mental wave.
An Aurora Marine flew through the air over me, ten metres up, his legs
missing.
I ran on, scything my blade at the escaped prisoners who menaced me.
The road was covered with the dead. Humans, on fire from head to foot,
stumbled past me and collapsed on their faces.
The Trojan tractor team was on fire, its massive trailer slewed around.
Three of the enemy psykers lay dead on the payload space, and four void
shields remained intact, their occupants frantic within.
But the others...
Upwards of twenty-five alpha-level enemy psykers had escaped.
I saw the first, a stumbling, emaciated wretch of a man, near the end of
the trailer. Corposant flickered around his head and he was trying to eat a
screaming astropath novitiate.
My boltgun stopped his daemonic work.
I dropped to my knees, gasping and crying as the second found me. She
was a stringy female, clad in a gauzy white veil, her fingernails like talons.
She cowered behind the end of the trailer, sobbing and lashing out at me
with her foul power. She had no eyes.
I am not alpha-class. My brain was broiling and bubbling.
A Thracian guardsman ran at her from the left, and instinctively, she
turned her attention to him. His head popped like a blister.
I shot her through the heart and knocked her flat on her back. Her limbs
continued to thrash for over a minute.
Electrical discharge spat out at me from nearby in the crowd. People,
screaming and burning, tumbled frantically back from a male psyker who
was striding, head down, towards the hives. He was a dwarf, with stunted
limbs and an enlarged cranium. Ball lightning crackled around his pudgy
fingers.
I stabbed at him with my mind, just to get his attention and then exploded
his face with a pin-point bolt.
Emperor save me, he kept coming. I had blown the front off his skull, but
he kept coming. Blind, his features a gory mess. He stumbled across the
ground towards me, his still-active mind boring into mine.
I fired again, almost panicking myself, and blew off one of his arms. Still
he came on. My jacket, hair and eyelashes caught fire. My brain was about
to explode out of my skull.
A Space Marine in the colours of the Aurora Chapter came at him from
behind and shredded him into pulp with his boltgun.
‘Inquisitor?’ the Marine asked me, his voice distorted by his helmet mic.
‘Are you all right?’
He helped me up.
‘What insanity is this?’ he rasped.
‘You have a vox-channel, Marine? Alert Lord Orsini!’
‘Already done, inquisitor,’ he crackled.
Behind us, the tractors exploded en masse, flinging fire and debris high
into the air.
A scalded child ran past us, shrieking.
The Marine grabbed the child in his massive arms.
‘This way, this way, out of danger...’
‘No,’ I said slowly. ‘Don’t... don’t...’
His visored face swung up at me in confusion, the child cradled in his
arms.
‘Don’t what?’ he asked.
‘Look at the brand! The mark there!’ I yelled, pointing to the Malleus
rune burned into the child’s ankle. The hammer of witches. The brand-mark
of the psyker.
The Chaos child looked up at me and grinned.
‘What mark?’ asked the Marine. ‘What mark are you talking about?’
‘I...I...’
I tried to fight it, please know that. I tried to repel the unholy power of
the child’s mind as it groped into my head. But this thing, this ‘child’, was
far beyond my powers to contain.
Kill him, it said.
My hand was shaking, resisting, as I swung the boltgun around and shot
the Marine through the head. A searing white agony flooded my horrified
being.
Now kill yourself, it suggested, chortling.
I put the smoking muzzle of the boltgun against my own temple, my
vision filled with the giggling face of the child, perched on the knee of the
collapsed, headless Marine.
That’s it... go on...
My finger tightened on the trigger.
‘No... n-no...’
Yes, you stupid fool... yes...
Blood streamed out of my nose. I wanted to fall to my knees, but the
monster wouldn’t let me. It wanted me to do one thing, and one thing only.
It implored me, ripping my consciousness apart.
It was strident and it was undeniable.
I pulled the trigger.
SEVEN
Voke, and speculations.
Esarhaddon.
Through the Void.
BUT I DID not die.
The boltgun, that gift from Librarian Brytnoth, which had never failed
me in ten decades of use, failed to fire.
The child-thing shrieked and leapt away into the smoke and flames and
struggling shapes around me. The dead Marine toppled over. The air frothed
with psychic discharge and three figures ran past me in pursuit of the tiny
abomination. Inquisitors. All three were inquisitors, or interrogators at least.
One, I was sure, was Inquisitor Lyko.
I lowered my shaking hand. Both it, and the boltgun it clutched, were
cased in psionic ice, the mechanism jammed and locked out.
I turned and found Commodus Voke standing a few paces behind me. His
ancient face was contorted with internal pressure. Crusts of psipathetic frost
glittered on his long black gown.
‘Point. It. Aside.’ His words came out as halting gasps. ‘I. Cannot. Hold.
It. Much. Longer.’
Swiftly, I turned the boltgun aside and up into the air. With a barking
gasp, he convulsively relaxed and the weapon bucked and fired. The deadly
round whined away harmlessly into the sky.
Voke was sagging, the gyros in the augmetic exo-skeleton that cradled his
frail body straining to manage his balance. I gave him my hand in support.
‘Thank you, Commodus.’
‘No matter,’ he said, his voice a whisper. His strength began to return and
he peered up at me with his bird-bright eyes. ‘Only a brave man or a fool
tangles with a plus-alpha psyker.’
‘Then I am both or neither. I was closest to the emergency. I could not
just stand by.’
WE WERE ASSAILED by extraordinary noises from the charnel ground
behind us. Gunfire, grenades, screams and the popping, surging sounds of
minds fracturing reality, compressing matter, boiling atmosphere. I saw a
robed man, an inquisitor or an astropath, rising slowly into the sky in a
pillar of green fire, burning, shredding inside out. I saw geysers of blood
like waterspouts. Squalls of hail and acid rain, localised to this small stretch
of the Avenue, blustered across us, triggered by the ferocity of the psychic
war.
Figures were rushing in to join that battle. Many from the ordos with
their expert bodyguards, and dozens of the Adeptus Astartes. There was a
vibration underfoot, and I saw that one of the towering Warhound Titans
was stalking past the Spatian Gate, spitting its turbo lasers at ground targets.
A series of withering explosions, mainly psyker-blasts, tore through the
habitats and hive structures on the eastern side of the wide – and now
infamous – Avenue.
Imperial Marauders flashed low overhead. The sky was black with
smoke, all sunlight blotted out. Wisps of ash fell on us like grey snow.
‘This is... a great crime,’ Voke said to me. ‘A black day in the Imperial
annals.’
I had forgotten how much Commodus Voke loved understatement.
THE GREATER PART of Hive Primaris remained lawless and out of control
for five days. Panic, rioting, looting and civil unrest boiled through the
streets and hab-levels of the wounded megapolis as the arbites and the other
organs of the Imperium struggled to impose martial law and restore order.
It was a desperate task. The indigenous population alone was vast, but it
had been swelled to an unimaginable extent by pilgrims and tourists for the
Novena. Sympathetic panic riots broke out in other hives too. For a day or
two, it seemed like the entire planet was going to collapse in blood and fire.
Small sections of Hive Primaris had managed to insulate themselves: the
elite spire levels; the noble houses, built like fortresses; the impregnable
precincts of the Inquisition, the Imperial Guard, the Astropathicus, the
various bastions of the Munitorium and the Royal Palace of the Lord
Commander. Elsewhere, especially in the common and general hab levels, it
was like a war zone.
The Ecclesiarchy suffered particularly gravely. With the Monument of
the Ecclesiarch in flames, the common masses regarded the nightmare as
some holy curse, and turned in their frenzy on all the churches, temples and
sacerdotal orders they could find. We learned within the first few hours that
Cardinal Palatine Anderucias had been killed in the destruction of the
Monument. He was far from the only great hierarch to perish in the orgy of
carnage that followed.
THE RECAPTURE OR extermination of the remaining rogue psykers was the
first and most fundamental task facing the authorities. Ten were known to
have escaped the initial battle on the Avenue of the Victor Bellum, and
these had fled into the hive, sowing carnage as they went, hunted by the
forces of the Inquisition and all the Imperial might that could be brought to
bear in support.
Two of them made it only a kilometre or two from the route of the
procession, hounded every step by Imperial forces from the Avenue battle,
and were neutralised by nightfall on that terrible first day. Another went to
ground in a vegetable cannery in an eastern sector outhab, and was laid to
siege. It cost three days and the lives of eight hundred Imperial Guardsmen,
sixty-two astropaths, two Space Marines and six inquisitors to blast it out
and burn it. The cannery, and the outhab for three square kilometres around
it, was flattened.
THERE WAS LITTLE or no central control for our forces. Admiral Oetron,
who had remained with the orbiting battlefleet as watch commander,
managed to move four picket ships into geo-synchronous orbit above Hive
Primaris, and for a while succeeded in providing comprehensive vox and
astropathic communications for the ground forces. But by nightfall on the
first day, psychic storms had blown up across the hive and all relayed
reception was lost.
IT WAS A dark and frightening period. Down in the burning streets, we
subdivided as best we could into small units, functioning autonomously.
Simply by dint of being with Voke, I became part of a group that made its
headquarters in an arbites section house on Blammerside Street in the
mercantile district. Desperate groups of citizens flocked to us, craving aid
and mercy and sanctuary, and much larger gangs attacked the section house
time and again, driven by fear, by rage against the Imperial machine or
simply because we wouldn’t let them in.
We couldn’t. We were overflowing with injured and dead, far too many
for the arbites surgeons and morgue attendants to manage. There was very
little food, medical supplies or ammunition left, and we were also rationing
water as the mains supply had been cut.
The power was down too, but the section house had its own generator.
All through the night, bottles and missiles and promethium bombs
splintered off the shielded windows, and fists pounded on the doors.
BY MERIT OF his seniority, Voke was in command. Aside from myself,
there was Inquisitor Roban, Inquisitor Yelena, Inquisitor Essidari, twenty
interrogators and junior servants of the Inquisition, sixty troopers from the
Interior Guard, several dozen astropaths and four White Consul Space
Marines. The arbites themselves numbered around one hundred and fifty,
and the section house was also sheltering about three hundred nobles,
ecclesiarchs and dignitaries from the Great Triumph, as well as a few
hundred common citizens.
I remember standing alone in a ransacked office of the arbites
commander just after midnight, looking out through shielded windows at
the burning streets and the blossoms of psyker storm that were wrenching
the sky apart. I had received no word or sign of Ravenor since the
catastrophe had begun. I remember my hands were shaking even then.
In truth, I believe I was in shock. From the event itself, naturally, and
also from the psychic assaults I had suffered in the course of it. I pride
myself on a sharp mind, but there was no sharpness to me then.
Numb, my brain kept returning to the idea that this outrage had been
deliberate.
‘There is no question,’ Voke said from behind me, clearly reading my
surface thoughts without my permission. He lifted and straightened a steel
chair and sat down on it.
‘Accidents happen, warplanes crash!’ he cried. ‘But these turned and
attacked. Their assaults were deliberate.’
I nodded. At least one of the Lightnings had crashed into the Warmaster’s
entourage and another had come down amongst the files of the Inquisition.
No one yet knew how many of my institution had been slain, but Voke had
seen enough of it to know that as many as two hundred of our fellow
inquisitors had been obliterated.
I remembered the conversation that had turned around my dining table,
the speculations about those powerful forces who would oppose Honorius’s
bestowment.
‘Is this the first act in a House war?’ I said. ‘The Ecclesiarchy, or perhaps
great dynasties, trying to thwart Lord Commander Helican’s advancement
of the Warmaster? His elevation to Feudal Protector would not have been
popular with many, powerful factions.’
‘No,’ he said. ‘Though I’m sure that’s what many will think. What many
will be supposed to think.’
Voke looked at me intently. ‘Freeing the psykers was the point,’ he said.
‘There is no other explanation. The Archenemy struck to cause mayhem
and allow the prisoners to escape, and to wound the section of the parade
that was most able to contain their escape.’
‘I won’t argue with that in principle. But was freeing the psykers the
point itself, or simply a means to an end?’
‘How so?’
‘Was it an attempt to liberate the psykers... or was this just an act of
extreme violence against the Imperium that the release of dangerous
psykers was meant to exacerbate?’
‘Until we know what was behind it, we can’t answer that.’
‘Could the psykers themselves have done it? Manipulated the minds of
the pilots?’
He shrugged. ‘We can’t know that either. Not yet. The Warmaster might
have been guilty of bravado in displaying his prisoners, but he would have
made certain security around them was seamless. I must suspect an outside
hand.’
We said nothing for a moment. Honorius Magnus himself had barely
survived the crash-blast and was undergoing emergency surgery aboard a
medical frigate at the navy-yard. No one yet knew if Lord Commander
Helican was alive. If he was dead, or if the Warmaster died of his injuries,
then Chaos would have won a historic victory.
‘I suspect an outside hand too,’ I told Voke. ‘Perhaps another psyker or
psykers, trailing their colleagues here to stage an escape.’
He pursed his lipless mouth. ‘The greatest triumph of my life, Gregor,
capturing those monsters in the name of the Emperor... and look what it
becomes.’
‘You can’t blame yourself for this, Commodus.’
‘Can I not?’ He squinted at me. ‘In my place, how would you feel?’
I shrugged. ‘I will make amends. I will not rest until every one of these
wretches is destroyed, and order restored. And then I will not rest until I
find who and what was behind it.’
He stared at me for a long time.
‘What?’ I asked, though I had a feeling I knew what was coming.
‘You... you were close to the scene, as you said to me. Closer than many,
and shielded from the worst of the destruction by the bulk of the Spatian
Gate.’
‘And?’
‘You know what I want to ask you.’
‘You thought you’d start with me. I’m too tired, Voke. I stopped to
honour the admiral’s tomb.’
He raised one eyebrow, as if he sensed I didn’t really believe it myself.
But at least he did me the courtesy of not ripping into my mind with his
much more powerful psychic abilities to scour out what truth might be
there. We had reached an understanding through our encounters over the
years, and were now even when it came to owing each other our lives.
He knew me well enough not to press this.
Not now, at least.
An interrogator hurried into the room.
‘Sirs,’ she said. ‘Inquisitor Roban wishes you to know that we have made
contact with one of the heretics.’
AS FAR AS could be learned, the rogue was an alpha-plus psyker called
Esarhaddon, one of the leaders of the coven. Sowing tumult and woe in his
wake, he had fled into the hive with a group led by Lyko and Heldane in
pursuit. Heldane had managed to contact one of Voke’s astropaths with a
scrambled summons for help.
Voke, Roban and I headed out into the hive streets with a kill team of
sixty that included the four White Consuls. Their squad leader was a
particularly large sergeant called Kurvel. We travelled on foot through the
debris and smoke. Gangs of citizens jeered and pelted missiles at us, but the
sight of four terrible Space Marines kept them at bay.
Esarhaddon, Voke warned me, was a being of dreadful intellect and not to
be underestimated. When we saw the monster’s choice of bolt-hole, I
understood what Voke meant.
THE NOBLE FAMILY of Lange was prominent in the aristocracy of Thracian
Primaris, and kept an ample summer palace in the east sector of Hive
Primaris, near to the mercantile quarter where they had made their fortunes.
The palace rose proud of the lowhab streets around it, swathed in its own
force bubble.
This had been one of the city areas we had supposed to be secure. With
their power and resources, noble houses should have been able to protect
themselves for the duration of the unrest.
But not against Esarhaddon. He was inside, with all the resources of the
palace to protect him.
We met Heldane on the western approach road to the palace. He had a
team of about twenty with him. The street itself was littered with bodies,
most of them citizens.
‘He’s controlling the crowds as if they were puppets,’ Heldane said
curtly, with no word of greeting. ‘Waves of them keep coming at us,
preventing us getting to the garden walls and the servants’ annex along
there.’
As I may have said, I had little time for Inquisitor Heldane. A very tall,
grim man, his face an unsightly mass of scar tissue since an encounter with
a hungry carnodon back on Gudrun. He’d been Voke’s pupil when I had
first met him; now he was a full inquisitor, with mental powers, it was said,
that exceeded even his old master’s. As I saw him there, I shuddered. He
had undergone extensive surgery, not to disguise the damage to his face, but
to exaggerate it. His skull seemed to have been extended into an almost
equine shape, with a snout-like mouth full of blunt teeth, and dark, murky
eyes. Fibre-wires and fluid tubes braided his cranium in place of hair. He
wore plasteel body armour the colour of blood and carried a segmented
power glaive.
‘Eisenhorn,’ he nodded, noticing me. It was like having a warhorse shake
its head in my direction.
‘They’re coming again!’ The cry went up from Heldane’s men. Down the
street, moving through the fire spills, figures were lurching towards us.
Weapons! Stand ready! Heldane had spoken, but not with his voice. His
psychic command shook through our skulls and some of our own troopers
looked dismayed.
Missiles rained down on us, and the Interior Guardsmen raised an
umbrella of riot shields. Small arms fired at us too, and an arbites near me
fell with his knee buckled the wrong way.
Our attackers, some hundred or more, were hive citizens, blank faced and
moving like marionettes. As Heldane had reported, some monumental
psychic force was making puppets out of them. The smoky night air ionised
with the psionic backwash.
I take no pleasure in actions like the one that followed. The beast
Esarhaddon was forcing us to fight innocent civilians just to protect
ourselves.
Maybe he thought we’d shrink from the task and leave him alone.
We, however, were the Inquisition.
Kurvel led his White Consuls at the front, banging their weapons against
their chest-plates and howling defiance through their helmet speakers. I saw
a promethium bomb strike one and shatter, swathing him in liquid flame.
He simply strode on.
We fired over the mob’s heads, trying to break them, but they had no will
of their own. Our firing became kill-shots. In ten minutes, we had
reluctantly added a fair number to the planet’s rising death toll.
That brought us to the corner of the street, facing the high walls of the
garden and the edge of the palace’s iridescent force shield itself.
I could hear a low chuckling in my head.
Esarhaddon.
Where’s Lyko? I heard Voke ask Heldane psychically.
He took a team around the front to try and disable the force wall.
‘You idiot!’ I said, out loud, looking over at Heldane. ‘This monster can
control a crowd that big and you mind-speak this close to him?’
‘This monster,’ Heldane replied, ‘can read every mind in the city and
beyond. He knows what we’re all doing. There is no point in secrecy. Just
effort. Is that beyond you?’
‘How long until the next attack?’ Kurvel asked, reloading his weapon.
‘They’ve become less frequent since we first arrived,’ replied Heldane.
‘However long it takes Esarhaddon to mind-search the surrounding habs
and recruit another puppet force. He’s having to cast his net wider each
time.’
‘How did he get in there?’ Roban asked.
Heldane simply shook his head and shrugged. Roban, a robust inquisitor
of middle years dressed in brown and yellow layered robes, was a good
man, though I didn’t know him well. But he was an outspoken Xanthanite
and the ultra-puritan Heldane had little time for him.
Voke and Heldane fell to discussing possible assault plans with Kurvel as
the soldiers around us formed a defensive position.
‘This is a damned thankless task,’ Roban said to me. ‘I don’t even know
why we’re here!’
‘Cannon fodder,’ said his youthful interrogator, Inshabel, bluntly, and it
made us both laugh.
‘There has to be something...’ I said. I took out my pocket scope and
tried to read the energy patterns and spectrums.
‘You!’ I called to one of the arbites in our party, a grizzled precinct
commander in full riot gear.
‘Inquisitor?’
‘What’s your name?’
‘Lucius, sir.’
‘Dear God-Emperor!’ I sighed again and Roban laughed once more.
‘Okay, Luckless – this palace must come into your precinct’s patrol area.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘So street security around it is your responsibility.’
‘Again, yes sir.’
‘So... just as a matter of procedure, your section house will have on file
the shield type and harmonics for the palace, in case of emergencies.’ In my
experience, it was standard protocol for any arbites precinct to know such
things about key structures within their purview.
‘It’s classified, sir.’
‘Of course it is,’ I sighed again. ‘But now would be a good time.’
He got on his vox-link and after a lot of effort, managed to get a channel
open to the section house.
‘You’re on to something, aren’t you?’ Roban asked me.
‘Maybe.’
‘The wily Inquisitor Eisenhorn—’
‘The what?’
‘No offence. Your reputation precedes you.’
‘Does it now? In a good way?’
Roban grinned and shook his head, like a man who might have heard
something, but who had decided to make up his own mind.
‘IT’S AN OLD type-ten conical void,’ Arbites Commander Lucius reported
presently. ‘Tangent eight-seven-eight harmonic wave. We don’t have an
override code. Lady Lange wouldn’t permit it.’
‘I bet she wishes she had now,’ said Interrogator Inshabel, caustic and to
the point once again. I was beginning to like him.
‘Thank you, Luckless,’ I said.
‘It’s... Lucius, sir.’
‘I know.’
I tried to remember everything Aemos had counselled me about shields
over the years. I wished I had his recall. Better still, I wished I had him
here.
‘We can collapse it,’ I said, with fair confidence.
‘Collapse a void shield?’ Roban asked.
‘It’s conical... super-surface only. And it’s old. Voids shrug off just about
anything, but they don’t retain their field if you take out one or more of the
projectors. That buttress there, the one the garden wall is built around, that’s
got to be one of the projector units, seated down into the ground.’
Roban nodded, apparently impressed. ‘I see the logic, but not the
practice.’
I walked over to Brother-Sergeant Kurvel, interrupting his conversation
with Heldane without apology, and explained what I wanted to do.
Heldane scoffed at once. ‘Lyko’s already trying that!’
‘How?’
‘He’s located the outer controls at the front gate and is trying to break
their coding...’
‘Coding and controls that will be dead and locked out thanks to
Esarhaddon. Lyko’s wasting his time. We can’t switch this off. We can’t
break Esarhaddon’s control over its system. But we can undermine the
system itself.’
Heldane was about to speak again, but Voke shut him up.
‘I think Gregor may be on to something.’
‘Why?’
Voke pointed. Close to five hundred citizens were now advancing
towards us from streets on all sides.
‘Because as you pointed out, Heldane, the monster can hear us, and he
clearly doesn’t like the sound of this plan.’
IT TOOK KURVEL about ten minutes to gouge out the pavement and a
section of garden wall with his lightning claw, and all the while we were
under attack from the growing mob of puppets.
‘Sewer!’ Kurvel announced.
I turned to the others as shots and missiles rained down. ‘Commodus...
you have to hold them off a while longer.’
‘Count on it,’ he said.
‘Roban, get a small squad and follow me.’
Heldane wasn’t happy. But by then, Heldane wasn’t calling the shots any
more. I believe he took his rage out on the enslaved citizens.
I DROPPED INTO the sewer hole with Kurvel, Roban, Inshabel and three
troopers of the Interior Guard. The defence on the street above could barely
spare any of them.
The filthy sewer tube went in under the wall itself before dropping
sharply away. Old, patched stone swelled around the base of the buttress.
The stone was warm, and foamy clumps of fungus were growing on it.
Inshabel trained a spotbeam in so I could see.
Kurvel could see in the dark. He took out his last two krak grenades and
fixed them to the stonework with smears of adhesive paste from a tube he
carried in his pack.
‘I wish we had more. We could blow the wall right through.’
‘We could, brother-sergeant, but this might be better.’
‘Why?’
‘Because if we can simply make this projector fail, the energies of the
shield will short out before they collapse. Rather than blowing outwards,
that’ll cause an electromagnetic pulse within the field itself. And I think an
EM pulse is the last thing Esarhaddon wants right now.’
As if to prove my suspicions right, a stabbing sheet of psychic power
lashed at us. Esarhaddon had realised his vulnerability, and was turning his
immense power on us now. The puppets had been sport, but now it was
time to control or blast out the minds of his hunters before they stopped
being playthings and became a danger.
The psyker attack was devastating. Two of the Interior guardsmen simply
died. Another started firing, hitting Kurvel twice and wounding Inshabel.
Regretfully, Roban blasted the trooper down with his laspistol.
Our minds were harder to attack, especially given the shield formed by
the rock above us and our proximity to the energy flux of the shield.
But Roban, Inshabel, Kurvel and I would be dead or homicidal in
seconds.
How I wished for Alizabeth, or any of the Distaff right then.
‘Trigger it! Trigger it!’ I gasped, the blood vessels in my nose and throat
opening yet again that day.
‘We’re right on top of the—’
‘Just do it, brother-sergeant! In the name of the God-Emperor!’
THE BLAST TOOK out the projector. It filled the sewer tunnel with
flickering destruction. It would have killed us but for the fact that Brother-
Sergeant Kurvel shielded us with his massive armoured body.
It cost him his life.
I have made a point to have his name and memory celebrated by the
Primarch of the White Consuls.
WITH THE GENERATING projector killed, the void shield collapsed in on
itself, blacking out the palace systems with the thunderclap of
electromagnetic rage.
Blacking out Esarhaddon’s seething mind too.
My research into untouchables, through Alizabeth and then through the
Distaff she created and ran, had indicated to me that perhaps psychic power,
no matter how potent, relied in the final analysis on the electrical workings
of the human mind, the firing of impulse charges between synapses.
Untouchables somehow blanked this, and triggered a disturbing and
disarming vacancy in the natural and fundamental processes of the human
brain. That, I had initially concluded, was why psykers don’t work around
untouchables... and why forgetfulness and unease is prevalent in their
company. And, ultimately, why they disturb and upset humans so, and
psykers doubly so.
I’d turned the old void shield into a brief, bright untouchable event.
And now, Emperor damn him, the heretic psyker Esarhaddon,
temporarily rendered deaf, blind and mute, was mine.
EIGHT
Esarhaddon’s lair.
Lyko the victor.
A vestige.
WE WENT INTO the grounds of the Lange palace over the wall. There was
a harsh stink of ozone from the ruptured shield, and the trimmed fruit trees
and laraebur hedges of the gardens were singed and smouldering.
With Roban and Inshabel, I ran down a flint-chip path between the
servants’ wing and the east portico. Flashlights and under-muzzle torches
bobbed in the gardens behind us as Heldane led the main force of our troop
round to the garden terrace.
The house was dead and dark, all power killed by the pulse. The main
doors on the east portico lay splintered on the mosaic floor where the
accompanying wave of overpressure from the void collapse had blown
them in. All of the windows were smashed holes too.
Photo-receptors and climate controls in the portico’s polished blue-wood
panels were fused and charred. Smoke and the glow of flames issued from
deeper in the palace.
We pushed further in, finding dead house staff and inert servitors. A
whole suite of state rooms on the first floor was burning where ornate
promethium lamps had been knocked over.
We checked the rooms on each side as we progressed. Roban led the way,
sweeping his braced laspistol from side to side.
‘How long?’ Inshabel asked me.
‘Until?’
‘Until he recovers from the pulse?’
I didn’t know. There was no telling how badly we’d hurt Esarhaddon, or
how resilient his mind was. We hadn’t got long.
On the second floor, a flight of aethercite steps brought us up into a grand
banqueting hall. The roof, a turtleback of toughened glass, had fallen in and
the psi-storms crackled and surged in the sky far above. Every step
crunched glass or disturbed debris.
There were bodies here too, the bodies of nobility and servants
intermingled.
I heard movement and sobbing from an adjoining antechamber.
The wretched occupants of the room gasped in terror as our flashlights
found them. A handful of survivors from the household, cowering in fear in
the dark. Many displayed signs of psychic burns or telekinetic welts.
‘Imperial Inquisition,’ I said firmly but quietly. ‘Stay calm. Where is
Esarhaddon?’
Some flinched or moaned at the sound of the name. A regal dowager in a
torn pearlescent gown curled up in the corner and began weeping.
‘Quickly... there’s little time! Where is he?’ I thought to use my will to
spur them into an answer, but their minds had been tortured enough already
that night. Even a mild mental probe might kill some of them.
‘W-when the lights went out, he ran... ran towards the west exit,’ said a
blood-soaked man dressed in what I presumed was the uniform of the
House Lange bodyguard.
‘Can you show us?’
‘My leg’s broken...’
‘Someone else then! Please!’
‘Frewa... you go. Frewa!’ The bodyguard gestured to a terrified page boy
crouching behind a column.
‘Come on, lad, show us the way,’ Roban said encouragingly.
The boy got to his feet, his eyes white with fear. I wasn’t sure if he was
more afraid of Esarhaddon or the inquisitors looming over him.
A COMMUNICATING HALLWAY ran from the rear of the banquet hall west
towards the house’s private landing platform. Specks of blood and glass
twinkled along its tiled floor.
I felt what seemed to me a breath of wind on my skin. An exit to the
outside, perhaps?
Heavy blast shutters were prised open in the entrance to the gloomy
loading dock. Past the shadowy shapes of several slumped, dormant cargo
servitors, stood a main hatchway through which cold exterior light
flickered.
My weapon raised, I waved Roban and Inshabel round to the right. The
page boy cowered back in the doorway. The air quality was changing, as if
the atmosphere itself was stiffening and drawing tight. Like some great
force gathering its breath.
Esarhaddon was recovering, I was certain.
Livid green light suddenly bathed the loading dock, a psychometric flare
accompanying a burst of savage psionic power. Roban and I staggered, our
lungs squeezed and fingers of telekinesis thrusting at our minds. Inshabel
cried out as he was bowled over from behind by the page boy, Frewa. Dull-
eyed and frothing at the mouth, the boy had been reduced, in an instant, to a
mindless puppet. Inshabel fought, but the boy was feral, and despite the
interrogator’s superior bulk he was pinned.
The pain in my head was intense, but I knew Esarhaddon must still be
way below full strength. I raised the strongest mind shield my abilities were
able to conjure and moved forward.
There was a sudden grind of servo-gears. A large steel paw swung at my
head and I dived back.
A cargo servitor, its metal carapace caked with verdigris, rose up to its
full height of three metres and clanked across the deck towards me on squat
hydraulic legs. Plumes of steam squirted from its broad shoulder joints as it
pistoned its arms at me again. Hot yellow dots of light burned in the eye
sockets of its dented visor.
Despite its mechanical appearance, the cargo drone, like all servitors, was
built around human organic components: brain, brain-stem, neural network,
glands – so Esarhaddon could control it just like a standard human.
It swung at me again, and missed. The slicing limb had cut the air with a
distinct whistle.
It was built like a great simian: squat legs, barrel chest, wide shoulders
and long, thick arms. Ideal for hefting heavy cargo items into the belly-hold
of a liftship.
Ideal for smashing a human body into gory paste.
Roban cried out a warning. A second, larger cargo servitor with a long
quadruped body, was also moving. Its body casing was pitted, brown metal
and it had a fork-lifter assembly where its head should have been, giving it
the appearance of a bull. The greased black forks of the lifter lurched at
Roban, who fired six or seven shots that dented or bounced off the
machine’s chassis.
I ducked two more slow, heavy blows from the ape-servitor. We were
losing precious time. With every tick of the clock, Esarhaddon was
recovering and becoming more powerful.
I put a bolt round into the thickest part of the servitor’s body and rocked
it back, the gears and pistons of its legs whining as they compensated for
the recoil.
My power sword was out now, the blade burning. Blessed for me by the
Provost of Inx, it was my weapon of choice. My swordsmanship had always
been good, but Arianrhod had instructed me in the Carthaen Ewl Wyla Scryi
before her death. Ewl Wyla Scryi, literally, ‘the genius of sharpness’, the
Carthaen way of the sword.
I made a figure of eight turn, the ghan fasl, and then a back-hand
crosscut, the uin or reverse form of the tahn wyla.
The stroke was good. The energised blade sliced clean through the
servitor’s left forearm, sending the massive manipulator paw clattering to
the deck.
It lurched bodily at me, as if enraged, clawing with its remaining hand
and lashing with the fused, smoking end of its recently truncated limb.
I made a head-height horizontal parry called the uwe sax, and then left
and right block strokes, the ulsar and the uin ulsar. Sheets of sparks
cascaded from each hit against its metal body. I ducked right under the next
huge blow, spun round out of the crouch and came up to face it again in
time to follow through with the ura wyla bei, the devastating diagonal
downslash, left to right. My blade edge and tip sawed the servitor’s torso
plating wide open in an electrical flash.
The exchange had given me long enough to mentally identify the seat of
the servitor’s brain-stem component, lit up and glowing in my mind’s eye
with the psionic power that drove it. It lay deep under the carapace between
the collar bones.
One more uwe sar and then the ewl caer, the deathstroke. Tip first,
plunging clean through the bodywork, impaling the organic brain. I rested
the crackling blade there for a moment while the yellow dot eyes went out
and then ripped it clear again, sidestepping as the servitor slammed down
onto the flooring.
‘Roban!’ I called out, leaping over my despatched foe.
But Roban was dead. The servitor’s forks had his limp body impaled
through the belly and it was shaking it as if trying to dislodge him.
Inshabel was on his feet, tears streaming down his face as he blasted at
the servitor with his autogun.
Cursing, I ran forward, raised the power sword with both hands and
swung it down over the servitor’s back. I doubt the Carthaens, in all their
wisdom, have a name in the most hallowed Ewl Wyla Scryi for an enraged
downstroke that severs the backbone and torso of a servitor.
Inshabel ran to his dead master as the servitor collapsed, trying to pull the
corpse clear.
‘Later! Later for that!’ I said, spiking the command with my will.
Inshabel was close to losing his wits to anger and grief, and I needed him.
He snatched up his weapon and ran after me.
‘The page boy?’ I asked.
‘I had to hit him. I hope he’s just unconscious.’
WE CAME OUT into the storm-wracked night on the palace landing pad.
Psychic lightning splintered the sky above us and the wind lashed us. There
was no one on the pad itself, but a fight was raging on the lawns beyond. I
could see eight figures, some robed, some dressed in the body armour of the
Interior Guard, closing to surrounding a lone humanoid who crackled and
glowed with spectral light. Thorny jags of flame lit out from the cornered
figure and dropped one of the guardsmen as we watched. Esarhaddon. They
had Esarhaddon cornered.
Inshabel and I leapt down from the pad – a three metre drop onto the wet
grass – and ran to join the fray.
I could see Esarhaddon clearly now despite the rain. A tall, almost naked
man with wild black hair and a lean, stringy body, corposant gleaming and
sliding around his capering limbs.
We were just ten metres from the edge of the fight when one of the robed
figures raised a bulky weapon and blasted at the rogue psyker.
A plasma gun.
The violet beam, almost too bright to look at, struck Esarhaddon. In his
weakened state, he had no defence against it.
He ignited like an incendiary round and burned from head to foot in the
middle of the lawn.
LOWERING OUR WEAPONS, Inshabel and I walked to join the ring of figures
standing around the white hot pyre. As his robed and hooded acolytes
murmured prayers of grace and deliverance, Inquisitor Lyko set down his
plasma gun.
‘The Emperor will thank you, Lyko,’ I said.
He glanced round, seeing me for the first time. ‘Eisenhorn.’ He nodded.
His narrow face was lined and taut and his blue eyes hooded. He was only
about fifty years old sidereal, a mere youth by inquisitional standards.
Young enough for his promising career to survive the way this day’s
atrocity would tarnish his achievement on Dolsene.
‘I do not serve the Emperor for his gratitude. I do it for the glory of the
Imperium.’
‘Quite so,’ I said. I looked back at the molten heat that had been our
quarry. It mattered little to me that I’d made this opportunity for Lyko. He
could take the glory. I didn’t care. The escape of the psykers had stolen
much of the glory he had received of late. Hunting them down was the only
way he could make amends.
PLANETWIDE, THERE WAS some sense of rejoicing when it was announced
that Lord Commander Helican had survived the carnage unscathed, and that
Warmaster Honorius would live. That announcement came on the sixth day
of unrest, by which time the Imperial authorities had begun to reimpose
order on the stricken citizens of Thracian Primaris. But it helped. Common
folk who assumed themselves to be lost were calmed into believing law was
back in the hands of the great and good. Panics died away. Arbites units
unleashed their last few suppression raids against the die-hard recidivist
looters in the lowhabs.
My own spirits were not much lifted. For a start I was privy to the
confidential fact that Lord Commander Helican had actually died screaming
and shitting himself under a crash-diving Imperial Navy Lightning on the
Avenue of the Victor Bellum. A double had been arranged by the
Ecclesiarchy and the Helican Senatorum, and that double continued to act
in his place until, several years later, he ‘died naturally of old age’ and a
successor was established in less-turbulent circumstances.
I can speak of that public deceit now in this private record, but at the
time, communicating that secret was a death-crime for even the highest lord
of the Imperium. I was not about to break that confidence. I am an
inquisitor and I understand how fundamental it is to maintain public order.
IN ADDITION TO fatigue and the pain of my wounds, what darkened my
mood was the news about Gideon Ravenor. Now, of course, we all
understand what a priceless and brilliant contribution he was to make to
Imperial learning, and how that would never have happened if he had not
been confined to a life of mental rumination.
But back then, in that stinking hospice ward off the Street of Prescients,
all I saw was a young man, burned and crippled and physically paralysed, a
brilliant inquisitor ruined before he could fulfil his potential.
Ravenor, in the eyes of some, had been lucky. He had not been amongst
the one hundred and ninety-eight Inquisition personnel killed outright by
the crashing fighter that fell into the Great Triumph beyond the Spatian
Gate.
He, like fifty others, had been caught on the edge of the explosion and
lived.
My pupil was barely recognisable. A blood-wet bundle of charred flesh.
One hundred per cent burns. Blind, deaf, mute, his face so melted that an
incision had been made in the fused meat where his mouth should have
been so he could breathe.
The loss touched me acutely. The waste even more. Gideon Ravenor had
been the greatest, most promising pupil I had ever taught. I stood by his
plastic-sheeted cot, listening to the suck and drool of his ventilator and fluid
drains and remembered what Commodus Voke had said in the arbites sector
house on Blammerside Street.
‘I will make amends. I will not rest until every one of these wretches is
destroyed and order restored. And then I will not rest until I find who and
what was behind it.’
Right then, there, for Ravenor’s sake, I made that promise to myself too.
At that time, I had little idea what that would mean or where it would
take me.
I RETURNED TO the Ocean House at last on what would have been the
ninth and final day of the Holy Novena. There was no one to greet me, and
the place seemed empty and forlorn.
I stalked into my study, poured a too-large measure of vintage amasec
and flopped down into an armchair. It felt like an eternity since I had sat
here with Titus Endor, worrying over speculations that seemed now so
insignificant and remote.
A door opened. From the instant chill in the air, I knew at once it was
Bequin.
‘We didn’t know you’d returned, Gregor.’
‘Well, I have, Alizabeth.’
‘So I see. Are you alright?’
I shrugged. ‘Where is everybody?’
‘When the...’ she paused, considering her words. ‘When the tragedy
occurred, there was a great public commotion. Jarat and Kircher took the
staff into the secure bunkers for safety, and I locked myself away with the
Distaff in the west wing, waiting, hoping for your call.’
‘Channels were out.’
‘Yes. For eight days.’
‘But everyone is safe?’
‘Yes.’
I leaned out of my chair and looked at her. Her face was pale and drawn
from too many nights of fear.
‘Where’s Aemos?’
‘Outside, with Betancore, Kircher and Nayl. Von Baigg’s around too. Is...
is it true what we’ve heard about Gideon?’
‘Alizabeth... it’s...’
She crouched down and put her arms around me. It is difficult for a
psyker to be hugged by an untouchable, no matter how long and close their
personal history. But her intentions were good, and I tolerated the contact
for as long as seemed polite. When I gently pushed her back, I said, ‘Send
them in. In fact, send everyone in here.’
‘They won’t all fit, Gregor.’
‘The sea terrace, then. One last time.’
SITTING OR STANDING around in the lime glow of the sea terrace, the
numerous members of my faithful band looked at me expectantly. The place
was packed. Jarat had fussed around, bringing out drinks and sweetmeats
until I had pressed a glass of amasec into her gnarled hands and forced her
down into a chair.
‘I’m closing the Ocean House,’ I said.
There was a murmur.
‘I’m retaining the lease, but I have little wish to live here any more. In
fact, I have little wish to be on Thracian any more. Not after this... Holy
Novena. There seems no point maintaining a staff here.’
‘But, sir, the library?’ Psullus said from the back.
I held up a finger.
‘I will take up a contract arrangement with one of the hive
accommodation bureaux to keep the house in working order with servitors.
Who knows, sometime I might have need of a place here again.’
I refilled my glass before turning back.
‘But I wish to move my centre of operations. It’s compromised, if
nothing else.’
At that, Jubal Kircher looked into his cit-juice uncomfortably.
‘I wish to relocate the household to the estate on Gudrun. Its environment
suits me better than this... hive-hell. Jarat, you and Kircher will supervise
the packing and organisation for the move. I would like you to undertake
the duties of head of household at the Gudrun estate, if you are willing. I
realise you have never been off Thracian.’
She sat forward, her eyebrows raised, considering this sudden change to
her life. ‘I... I would be honoured to do so, sir,’ she said.
‘I’m pleased. The country air will do you good. The estate is managed by
a caretaker staff, so I’ll need a good housekeeper, and a good chief of house
security. Jubal... I’d like you to consider that job.’
‘Thank you, sir,’ said Kircher.
‘Psullus... we’re going to transplant the library permanently to Gudrun.
That task is yours, as is the ongoing duty of being my librarian. Can I
entrust you with it?’
‘Oh, yes... there will be problems, of course, the handling and care of
certain shielded texts and—’
‘But I can leave it with you?’
Psullus waved his frail hands at me in a gesture of excitement that made
everyone laugh.
‘I know this wholesale move will take months to manage and carry out.
Alain... I’d like you to supervise and oversee the whole thing.’
Von Baigg looked suddenly awkward. ‘Of – of course, inquisitor.’
‘This is a weighty task, interrogator. Are you up to it?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Good. I will return to the Gudrun estate no later than ten months from
now. I trust it will be the home I expect.’
It was a promise I would fail miserably to keep.
‘What of the Distaff, sir?’ asked Surskova.
‘I want to divide that,’ I said. ‘I want six of the best Distaff members sent
to Gudrun to bide there at my wishes. The future of the Distaff itself I see as
separate from my living arrangements. I have a lease on a spire-top
residence on Messina. That will be the new official home of the Distaff.
Surskova, you will supervise the move and establishment of the
untouchable school there.’
She nodded, shocked. Bequin seemed taken aback.
I looked round at the hundred-plus servants, warriors and aides crammed
into the room.
‘That’s it. Until I see you all again, may the God-Emperor protect you.’
I WAS LEFT alone with Aemos, Bequin, Medea and Nayl.
‘Not for us the chores of moving house,’ I said.
‘I had a hunch not,’ smirked Medea.
‘For us, two missions.’
‘For us?’ asked Bequin.
‘Yes, Alizabeth. Unless you think you and I are too old for such
diversions?’
‘No, I-I—’
‘I’ve been too long at the back of things. Too long relying on my capable
staff. I yearn for field work.’
‘The last field work we were in nearly got you killed,’ scolded Bequin
darkly.
‘Proving that I’m losing my edge, I think.’
‘For shame!’ muttered Nayl with a smile.
‘So we’re going to have an adventure, all of us. Just the few of us.
Remember what those were like, Aemos?’
‘Frankly, I’m still not over them, Gregor, but yes.’
‘Alizabeth?’
Bequin crossed her arms ill-humouredly. ‘Oh, I’d just love to come and
watch you get killed...’
‘We’re all agreed, then?’ I said. I can’t help being deadpan. Gorgone
Locke made sure of that. But my delivery was good enough to get Nayl and
Medea raucous with laughter and Aemos chuckling.
Alizabeth Bequin grinned despite herself.
‘Two missions, as I said. After this briefing, I’ll allow you to recruit a
few personnel from the staff. Nayl – a fighter or two you can count on.
Aemos – an astropath we can use without worry. Alizabeth – one or two
from the Distaff. A maximum of ten in the party, all told. No more, you
understand? Argue it out between yourselves. Don’t bring me into it. We
leave in two days, and I don’t want to even hear about any arguments
second hand.’
‘So what are the missions?’ asked Medea, lounging back in her padded
chair and slipping her long legs over the arm. She took a long swig of her
weedwine and added, ‘You said two, right?’
‘Two.’
I pushed a stud on a data wand in my hand and a hololithic screen fogged
into life over the table. The words of the message I’d received before the
start of the tumult on Thracian were displayed in shimmering letters:
‘Scalpel cuts quickly, eager tongues revealed. At Cadia, by terce. Hound
wishes Thorn. Thorn should be sharp.’
‘Shit!’ cried Nayl.
‘Is that authentic?’ Medea asked, looking at me.
‘It is.’
‘God-Emperor, he’s in trouble, he needs us...’ Bequin murmured.
‘Very probably. Medea, you have to arrange transit for us to Cadia. That’s
the first port of call.’
‘What’s the second?’ asked Aemos.
‘The second?’
‘The second mission?’
I looked at them all. ‘We all know how serious the Cadian matter is. But I
made a vow to Gideon. I want to find out what was behind the outrage here.
I want to find it, hunt it out and punish it.’
You know, it’s funny how things turn out.
IT WAS LATE, and we were devouring a splendid meal Jarat had prepared
for us. Nayl was telling a devastatingly crude joke to Aemos, Medea and
Bequin and I were talking over the rearrangement of the Distaff and the
missions ahead.
I think she was feeling excited. Like me, she’d been taking a back seat
for too long.
Kircher came up the terrace, entering the filmy green light.
‘Sir, you have a visitor.’
‘At this hour, who?’
‘He says his name is Inshabel, sir. Interrogator Nathun Inshabel.’
Inshabel was waiting for me in the library.
‘Interrogator. Has my staff offered you refreshment?’
‘None needed, sir.’
‘Very well... so to what do I owe this visit?’
Inshabel, no more than twenty-five, pushed his thick blond hair out of his
eyes and looked at me fiercely. ‘I... I am masterless. Roban is dead...’
‘God-Emperor rest him. He will be missed.’
‘Sir, do you ever think what it would be like if you died?’
The notion stopped me in my tracks. I had, in all honesty, never
considered it.
‘No, Inshabel. I haven’t.’
‘It’s a terrible thing, sir. As Roban’s senior acolyte it falls to me to
disburse his staff, his fortune, his knowledge. I’m left to tidy up, as it were.
I have to make sense of Roban’s estate.’
‘You will not fail in that duty, interrogator, of that I’m sure.’
He smiled weakly. ‘Thank you, sir. I had... I had thought to come to you,
and beg you to take me on. I so very much want to be an inquisitor. My
master is dead, and I know that your own... your own interrogator is...’
‘Indeed. I choose my own staff, of course. I—’
‘Inquisitor Eisenhorn. Begging you to take me on as a driftwood student
was not why I came here. As I said, I had to close up Roban’s estate. That
meant filing and authorising the pathologica statement of his death.
Inquisitor Roban was killed by a cargo servitor manipulated by a rogue
psyker.’
‘Yes?’
‘So to complete the papers, I had to review the death notice of
Esarhaddon so as to establish causal motive.’
‘That is the procedure,’ I admitted.
‘The statement was very brief. Esarhadon’s corpse was burnt from the
calves upwards and utterly immolated. As in the incidents of spontaneous
human combustion, the relics left by the plasma weapon were little more
than the flesh and bones of the feet and ankles. Just bare vestiges.’
‘And?’
‘There was no Malleus brand on the ankle flesh.’
‘It—What..?’
‘I don’t know who Inquisitor Lyko burned on the lawns of the Lange
house... but it wasn’t the heretic Esarhaddon.’
NINE
Eechan, six weeks later.
A word with the Phant.
Knives in the night.
THE BICEPHALIC MINDER in the squalid doorway of the twist bar regarded
us with one of his lice-ridden heads, while the other glazed out, smoking an
obscura pipe.
‘Not your place, not your kind. Get on.’
The sap rain was falling heavily on our heads through the rotten awning,
and I had little wish to stand in it any longer. I nodded a sidelong glance to
my companion, who tugged back his hood and showed the minder the
cluster of malformed, winking eyes that mottled his cheek and ran down his
pallid throat. I raised my own damp cloak and revealed the knot of stunted
tentacles that sprouted from an extra sleeve slit under my right armpit.
The minder got off his stool, one head nodding dozily. He was big, broad
and tall as an ogryn, and his greasy skin was busy with tattoos.
‘Hnh...’ he muttered, limping around us as he sized us up. ‘Maybe then.
You didn’t smell like twists. Okay...’
We went inside, down a few dark steps into a nocturnal club room that
was fogged with obscura smoke and pulsing with a brand of harsh,
discordant music called ‘pound’. Panes of red glass had been put over the
lights of the lanterns and the place was a hellish swamp, like the damnation
paintings of that insane genius Omarmettia.
Malforms, deforms, halfbreeds and underscum huddled or gambled or
drank or danced. On a raised stage, a naked, heavy-breasted, eyeless girl
with a grinning mouth where her navel should have been gyrated to the
pound beat.
We reached the bar, a soiled curve of hardwood under a series of hard
white lights. The barkeep was a bloated thing with bloodshot eyes and a
black snake tongue that flickered between his wet, slit mouth and rotting
teeth.
‘Hey, twist. What will it be?’
‘Two of those,’ I said, pointing to clear grain-alcohol shots that a waitress
was carrying past on a tray. She would have been beautiful except for the
yellow quills stippling her skin.
Twists. We were all twists here. ‘Mutant’ is a dirty word if you’re a
mutant. They delight in referring to themselves by the Imperium’s glibbest
and most detrimental slang, as a badge of honour. It’s a pride thing, a
common habit with any underclass. Non-telepaths do it when they call
themselves ‘blunts’. The tall, slender people of low-grav Sylvan do it when
they call themselves ‘sticks’. A slur’s not a slur if you use it on yourself.
Labour laws on Eechan permit twists to work as indentured labourers in
the industrial mill-farms and the sap distilleries, provided they abide by the
local regime and keep themselves to the licensed shanty towns huddled in
the skirts of the bad end of Eechan mainhive.
The barkeep slapped two heavy shotglasses down on the counter and
filled them to the brim with grain liquor from a spouted flask.
I tossed a couple of coins down and reached for my drink.
The bloodshot eyes leered at me.
‘What’s this? ’Perial coins? Come now, twist, you know we ain’t allowed
to trade in those.’
I paused. A glance down the counter showed me that the rest of the
clientele were paying in mill-authorised coupons or nuggets of base metal.
And that they were all staring and scowling at us. A basic mistake, right off
the bat.
My companion leaned forward and sipped his drink. ‘Don’t get fret with
two thirsty twists who’s happened to have lucked into a good black score,
eh?’
The barkeep smiled and his black tongue flickered. He scooped up the
coins. ‘Ain’t no fret, twist. You earn ’em, I’ll take ’em. Just sayin’ you
might not want to go flashing ’em, s’all.’
We took our drinks away from the bar, looking for a table. It had taken
six weeks to reach Eechan, and I was impatient for a lead.
The beat changed. Another pound number began pumping through the
underfloor speakers, which to my untutored ears was simply a variation in
auditory assault. But the crowd clapped and roared approval. The naked girl
with the grinning stomach began rotating her hips the other way.
‘I have a feeling I should be leaving this to you,’ I whispered to my
companion.
‘You’re doing fine.’
‘“Don’t get fret, twist...”. for God-Emperor’s sake... where did you learn
to talk like that?’
‘You never hung with twists?’
‘Not like this...’
‘So I’m guessin’ you don’t s’love that genejack pound beat, twist?’
‘Stop it or I’ll shoot you.’
Harlon Nayl grinned and blinked with all his sixteen eyes in mock
offence.
‘Sup up, twist. If that ain’t Phant Mastik, I’ll poke my eyes out.’
‘Oh, let me,’ I hissed, and slugged back my shot. ‘Raise ’em and sink
’em and let’s have another!’ I grimaced to myself as the burning spirit
scalded down my oesophagus, and then scooped two more drinks from the
tray of the porcupine girl as she sashayed past.
Phant Mastik sat with his cronies in a side booth. Generations of rad-
storm mutation had made him an obese thing with wrinkled flesh and
enlarged features. His ears were frayed fan-like swathes of veiny skin and
his nose was a drooping proboscis. An incongruous tuft of thick red hair
decorated his neanderthal brow.
His eyes were deep-set and black.
And sad, I thought. Tremendously sad.
He was drinking from a big tankard by snorting the alcohol up through
his dangling nose. His mouth, distorted by tusk-like jags of tooth, was
useless. A twist whore, with an unnecessary number of arms, was sipping
her drink, smoking an obscura stick, retouching her makeup and doing
something to Phant under the table that he was clearly enjoying.
We approached.
Phant’s minders got up immediately to block us. A homed brute and a
twist whose entire head was a wrinkled skin hood for an outsized eye. They
both reached into their robes.
‘How you tonight, twists?’ puffed Horn-brute.
‘We fine. No fret, just s’gotta talk to the Phant,’ said Nayl.
‘Ain’t not gonna happen,’ said Big-eye, his voice muffled by his
clothing. God-Emperor knew where his mouth was.
‘I s’think so, when we have us such a scalding black score him to enjoy.’
Nayl didn’t shrink back.
++Let them through++ Phant said, his voice conveyed by an augmetic
carry-sound unit. A vox-implant. Few twists had the money for that. Phant
was certainly a player.
The minders stepped aside and allowed us into the booth. We sat.
++Go on++
‘Twist, I s’tell ya, we be in the market for section-alpha brainjobs. We
s’hear you got one for the begging.’
++Hear? Where?++
‘Round and around,’ said Nayl.
++Uh huh. And you are?++
‘Just two twists s’gonna earn us a deal,’ I said.
++That right?++
We sat in silence for a moment as Phant called for more drinks. The girl
was now combing and fixing her hair and doing her make-up. One of her
many hands was on my knee under the table.
She winked at me.
With an eye growing from the end of her tongue.
++What I got, ain’t no section-alpha, twists. S’section-alpha-plus++
‘That is s’why we came to you, Phant! S’why! No upper limit for our
buy!’
++How U gonna pay?++
Nayl dropped one of the ingots onto the table.
‘Pure mellow-yellow. And we got the bars. Much as it takes. So...?
S’when-where?’
++I gotta talk to some people++
‘Kay’
++Where can I reach U?++
‘The Twist and Sleep.’
++You sleep tight. Maybe I call you++
THE AUDIENCE WAS over. We took a table of our own near the raised stage
and stayed for a couple more rounds, making a show of appreciating the
indecent writhings of the girl with the belly mouth.
After an hour or so, we saw Phant and his retinue leave by a side door.
‘Let’s go,’ I said. We finished our drinks and rose. Nayl gave porcupine girl
a handful of coins and patted her bottom. Her quills bristled, but she smiled.
The minder didn’t spare us a look with either of his heads as we left. Out
of sight, round the corner of the dreary barstoop, I handed Nayl one of a
pair of brass stimm-injectors and we detoxed quickly to rid our bodies of
the alcohol dulling our systems.
It was the dead of night, but there was little darkness. The great curve of
Eechan’s ring systems glowed with reflecting sunlight and shone like bands
of diamond-crusted platinum.
The main street of the shanty was a rutted, water-logged morass, and
flaking boardwalk pavements edged the rows of slumping, dingy buildings.
Glowing signs and the few street lamps reflected in the street puddles.
Beyond the shanty, to the west, the alpine slopes of the mainhive rose
against the stars, like a dark mountain of trash decorated with a million little
lights. To the east were the stacked, grubby mushrooms of the mill-farms
and the distilleries, venting brown steam and yellow pollutants into the
wind.
To the south, in the verdant farm lands, plains of thick, rubbery growth,
we could see the running lights of several vast harvesters. They were
segmented juggernauts; beetle-like machines the size of small starships,
chewing up the greenbelt with massive reaping mandibles and digesting it
through vast interior vats and worklines. Flues lined their backs like spines
and spewed moisture waste and atomised sap up high into the atmosphere,
where it drifted and fell again like rain. Everything in the twist shanty was
sticky with sap-fall. The rain was tacky and thick like syrup. The street
puddles were viscous. Downpipes glugged and throbbed rather than
pouring. Everywhere, there was a stench of decomposing plantfibre and
liquefied cellulose.
‘Do you think he took the bait?’ I asked.
Nayl nodded. ‘You could see he was interested. Gold’s rare on Eechan.
His eyes lit when I showed him that ingot.’
‘He’ll want to check us, though.’
‘Of course. He’s a businessman.’
We walked along the street, hoods raised against the sticky rain. There
were a few mutants around, all of them dressed in rancid tatters. They
shambled along, lurked in doorways around covered braziers, or shared
obscura bottle-pipes out of the rain in dim breezeways.
A squirt of sirens warbled down the main street and Nayl pulled me into
an alley-end. A black armoured land speeder with blazing grilled lamps
crept past.
I saw the crest motif of the mainhive arbites on the side and an armoured
officer sat in the top hatch manipulating a spotlight.
The beam played across us and passed along. Another flute of siren-noise
sounded and we heard a vox-amplified voice demand, ‘Idents and papers,
you five. Now!’
Moaning and grumbling, a pack of twists moved out into the street, lit by
the spot-beam, as the officers dismounted to shake them down and run their
gene-prints through the system.
Something we couldn’t afford to let happen. Not if we wanted to
maintain our position as anonymous mutants. One flash of my credentials
would speed us past any arbites red-tape. But it might also alert Lyko.
I’d insisted on full concealment for the mission. No one knew we were
here, officially. Aemos had done some surreptitious checking, and there was
no official trace of Lyko either. But that was to be expected, and there was
no telling how many mainhive officials he might have back-handed to alert
him of any Inquisitorial presence.
Nayl and I turned west at the next junction, and followed the maze of
alleys and breezeways between the rents and mill-habs to reach the Twist
and Sleep by a circuitous route that would keep us off the main
thoroughfares and away from arbites patrols.
And, as it turned out, bring us right into trouble.
IT DIDN’T LOOK like trouble at first. A short, flat-browed runt in rags
stepped into our path, grinning like a salesman. He held his hands open, as
if he was going to curtsy. ‘Twists, my twists, my friends... spare a few
’perials for a poor badgene down on his luck,’ I heard Nayl begin to say,
‘Not tonight, twist. S’get you to one side,’ But I had already tensed. How
had this scabscum known to ask for Imperial coins if he hadn’t seen us at
the bar and followed us on purpose?
His accomplices came out of the gloom and sap-rain behind us.
I rammed the word Evade! hard into Nayl’s mind with a ’pathic surge
and dropped.
A massive, spiked weapon sailed through the space our heads had just
been occupying and connected with nothing but air.
The runt who had waylaid us uttered quite the most obscene series of
curses I have ever, ever heard and dived on me. He had a double-headed
dagger with a nurled hand-guard.
I caught his upflung wrist as he made to gouge at me, broke his elbow
and kicked him through a nearby fence while he was still screaming in pain.
‘Boss! Move!’ I heard Nayl sing out and I rolled hard aside in the mud as
the spiked weapon slammed down into the mire.
It was a thick length of timber with dozens of nails and knife blades
hammered through it.
The friendly end of it was held by two amazingly large paws. The paws
belonged to a hulk, a two hundred kilo monster covered with blistered fish-
scales and bony scutes. It wore only a pair of ragged blue trousers held in
place around its midriff, almost comically, by a pair of red braces.
It swung the spike-post at me again, and I had to dive and shoulder-roll to
escape it.
Nayl was going toe-to-toe with two others: a snouted female in black
leather whose mouth and nose were hideously combined into one drooling,
snarling organ, and a tall, thin male with a face peculiarly distorted by bone
and gristle.
The female had a reaping sickle in each hand, and the tall male was
armed with a mace made out of a reinforced strut toothed with the rusting
blades of two wood saws.
Nayl had drawn his serrated shortsword and duelling knife and was
fending off thrusts and strikes from both of them.
A power sword, a boltgun, a lascarbine... they would all have finished
this unnecessary encounter fast enough. But we had agreed to carry nothing
that would mark us out from the twist population. Tech-levels were low in
the shanty. A plasma gun might have ended this quickly, but stories would
have got round.
The scaly giant was on me again, and I fell through the rotting flakboard
of a fence in my efforts to evade his swing. I found myself lying amid the
debris in the back yard of one of the loathsome hab-rents. A light went on
in an upper window and abuse, stones and the contents of a chamber pot
were hurled at me.
The giant came on, swinging his club from side to side. The nails and
blades were darkly caked with dried blood.
He backed me towards the rear of the rent dwelling and made to swing
again.
No! I commanded, using the will. He stopped dead. The rain of abuse and
excrement from above stopped too.
It would take him a moment to reconfigure his mind and find his anger
again. I moved right at him, punching a knuckle-curved fist at the place
where his nose should have been. There was a crack of bone and a spray of
blood.
The giant went down hard on his back, his nasal bone slammed back into
his brain.
Nayl seemed to be enjoying his uneven duel. He was jeering at his
attackers, deflecting the sickles with his sword and blocking the strenuous
attacks of the mace with his knife. I saw him spin and belly-kick the male
away, then turn to give the ghastly, snorting female his full attention.
But more figures were emerging from the night.
Ugly, abhuman scum dressed in rags. Three, four of them.
I called a warning out to Nayl and pulled out my blackpowder pistol. It
was a clumsy antique I’d acquired from the black market on Front’s Planet,
but even so I’d dumbed it down to Eechan tech levels by replacing the
engraved furniture with a shaped piece of packet-wood.
The flintlock mechanism was in good order, though. It cracked loudly
with a fizz and a flash, the recoil punishing my wrist, and the ball went
point-blank through the forehead of the nearest twist, exploding the rear of
his cranium in a surprisingly messy fountain.
But it was a one-shot piece and there was no time for reloading.
Two of the remaining outlaws came right at me, the other turning to come
in on Nayl’s flank.
I broke the teeth of the first one to reach me with the rounded butt of the
pistol, and ducked the second’s poorly judged slice with a rapier.
Backing away, I drew my own blade. Also a rapier. Shorter by a good ten
centimetres than my opponent’s but balanced and guarded with a hand-net
of articulated metal struts.
Our blades clashed. He was good, trained to his skill by a life of
slaughter in the underhive. But I... I had me on my side.
I dazzled him with the ulsar and the uin ulsar, and then drove him back
with a four-stroke combination of pel ighan and uin pel ihnarr before
ripping the blade out of his dazed fingers with a swift tahn asaf wyla.
Then the ewl caer. My blade transfixed his torso. He looked confused for
a second and then fell down, sliding dead off my blade.
His broken-faced accomplice, blood spilling from my pistol whipping,
flew at me and I span, decapitating him with the edge of my blade. The
Carthaens believe side-blade work is lazy, and stress the use of the point.
But what the hell.
Nayl had killed the third attacker with a bodypunch, and as I turned, he
locked both of the female’s sickles around his twisting knife and ran her
through with his main blade.
He turned to me and raised his bloody shortsword to his nose in a salute.
I returned it with my rapier.
The siren of an arbites groundcar was wailing along the alley. ‘Time to be
gone,’ I said to Nayl.
‘I THOUGHT YOU were dead!’ Bequin cursed as Nayl and I burst in to the
room in the Twist and Sleep.
‘We had some fun on the way home,’ Nayl said. ‘Don’t worry, Lizzie, I
brought the boss back safe.’
I smiled and fixed myself a small amasec from the bureau. Bequin hated
to be called ‘Lizzie’. Only Nayl had the balls to do it.
Aemos was hovering by the window. Somehow, the rags of his twist
disguise suited him.
‘Most perturbatory... the arbites are coming this way.’
‘What?’
Nayl moved to the window.
‘Aemos is right. Three land cruisers pulled up outside. Officers coming
in.’
‘Hide yourselves, now!’ I ordered.
Aemos hurried through the communicating door into the other
bedchamber and threw himself down on the cot. Nayl blundered into the
adjoining bathroom and used a tooth mug and loud groans to suggest he
was busy throwing up.
Alizabeth looked at me frantically.
‘Into bed! Hurry!’ I ordered.
The arbites kicked open the door and played their flashlights over the
bed. ‘Hive arbites! Who’s in here?’
‘What is this?’ I asked, dragging the sheets back.
‘Streetfight killers... witnesses said they came in here,’ said the arbites
sergeant, advancing towards the bed.
‘Me, I been here all night. Me and my friends.’
‘They gonna vouch for you, twist?’ asked the sergeant, raising his
weapon.
‘Wass goin’ on? Too much light!’ said Bequin, emerging from the dirty
linen on the bed. Somehow she had removed her dress beneath the sheets.
Clad in brief underwear, she slithered on top of me.
‘Wass you doin’? Stoppin’ a girl makin’ her way? Shame on you!’
The sergeant ran his flashlight beam up and down the length of her body
as it clung to me. I smiled the inane smile of the lucky or well-oiled.
He snapped the light off. ‘Sorry to interrupt you, miss,’ The door closed
and the arbites thumped away.
I looked down at Bequin with a wink. ‘Good improvisation,’ I said.
She leapt off me and grabbed her clothes. ‘Don’t get any funny ideas,
Gregor!’
I’D HAD FUNNY ideas about her for years, truth be told. She was beautiful
and sublimely sexy. But she was also an untouchable. It hurt me to be close
to her, physically hurt.
I hate that fact. I feel a lot for Bequin and I long to be with her, but it was
never going to happen. Never, ever.
That’s one of the truly great sadnesses of my life.
And hers too, I hope, in my more self-aggrandising moments.
I lay in bed and watched her drag on her dress again, and I felt the pang
of desire.
But there was no way. No way in the galaxy.
She was untouchable. I was a psyker.
That way pain and madness lay.
TEN
Ruminations on Lyko.
The Chew-after.
The highest bidder.
TUMULTUOUS SAP-STORMS hammered the twist-town in the pre-dawn,
blanketing the sky with swirling vapours and shaking the tiles and shutters
with the gross weight of their heavy pelting goop. Thunder rolled. In the
aftermath, veils of mist swathed the countryside, and the stillness was alive
with gurgling and dripping and the swarming scurry of sap-lice and storm-
bugs.
Nayl went out early with Aemos and bought paper pails of warm food
from the twist-town commissary just down the street, which was already
serving the work lines forming for the shift change in the mills. By the time
they returned, we had been joined by Inshabel and Husmaan, who had slept
through the night’s altercation with the arbites in a shared room down the
hall.
I’d yet to formally notify the ordo that Inshabel had joined my band, but
he was now very much part of it. I felt he had the right to be here on this
mission, for Roban’s sake, and for his own. He had brought the news of
Esarhaddon to me, directly and selflessly. Few of my team yet referred to
him by his rank – it would be a long while until anyone eclipsed the
memory of Interrogator Ravenor – but he had meshed well, with his bright
mind and healthy, caustic wit. He was already providing me with more solid
service than Alain von Baigg had ever managed.
Duj Husmaan had been a skin-hunter on his homeworld of Windhover
when Harlon Nayl had first met him. That was back in Nayl’s bounty-
chasing days, before he’d joined my cause. I’d recruited Husmaan eight
years before on Nayl’s recommendation, and he’d proved to be a
resourceful, if superstitious, warrior with a great sense for pathfinding. Nayl
had personally selected him from the individuals in my retinue as muscle
for this venture, and I had no quibble with the choice.
Husmaan was a slender man of medium height with coppery skin and
white, sun-scorched hair and goatee. Here on Eechan, like all of us, he’d
drabbed down his clothing to ragged black twist robes. He ignored the
bundle of disposable wooden forks that Aemos had brought back from the
commissary and started to eat the hot food from his paper pail with his
fingers.
I picked at my own food idly, wondering how close we were to Lyko.
LYKO HAD BEEN a fool and had damned himself. The damaging revelation
that it hadn’t been Esarhaddon who had been torched on the lawns of the
Lange palace could have been circumvented if Lyko had kept his head. He
could have claimed it a mistake, another example of the heretic psyker’s
treachery.
But Lyko had run. Out of fear, or chasing some timetable, I didn’t know.
But he’d run and, in so doing, incriminated himself.
I’d gone to his residence, a rented hab high in the spires of Hive Ten, the
moment Inshabel had alerted me to the deceit. But Lyko had cleared out,
taking his people with him. His hab was empty and abandoned, with just a
few scatterings of trash left behind in the stripped rooms.
I had set my staff to work tracing him, a tall order given the planet-wide
data-access problems in the wake of the rioting. I had decided almost at
once to pursue him alone, without informing the Inquisition. You may see
this as odd, almost reckless. In a way, it was. But Lyko was an inquisitor of
good repute, held in high regard, and with many friends. There was scant
chance I could tell the ordos I was undertaking a hunt for him on the basis
he was harbouring a notorious rogue psyker without the fact reaching him,
or without his friends making trouble for me.
Those friends of his, of course, included Heldane and Commodus Voke:
the stalwart trio that had captured the thirty-three rogues on Dolsene in the
first place. How empty that ‘heroic’ action now seemed to me. I had been
so impressed when Lord Rorken had shown me the report. Perhaps the
‘capture’ had been easy, or even staged, if Lyko was secretly in league with
Esarhaddon. Perhaps it had all been part of an elaborate conspiracy to
perpetrate the atrocity of Hive Primaris.
I was dogged by grim, unanswerable speculations. I had no way to prove
Lyko was corrupt, not even now, though I certainly suspected it. He might
have been an unwitting pawn on Dolsene, or at the Lange palace, or he
might have been in it all along. It was possible too that his departure from
Thracian was a coincidence that I had misinterpreted. It wouldn’t have been
the first time an inquisitor had moved undercover without announcement.
It was even possible that he too had discovered the deceit after the event,
and was moving fast following some lead to make amends for his mistake.
Or that he was fleeing the shame... or...
So many possibilities. I had to play the odds the safest way. I was sure
Lyko was guilty to a greater or lesser extent, so I would follow him. Even if
he was simply chasing Esarhaddon too, it would lead me in the right
direction.
And I couldn’t inform the Inquisition, or talk to Voke or Heldane. My
uncertainty was such that I couldn’t even trust them not to be part of it.
A COMPLEX TRAIL of almost subliminal clues had put me on his tail. I’ll
spare you the bulk of the details, for they would merely document the
painstaking tedium that is often the better part of an inquisitor’s work.
Suffice to say, we searched and processed vox logs, and the broadcast
archives of the local and planetary astropathic guilds. We watched ship
transfers, orbital traffic, departure lists, cargo movements. I had personnel
in the streets, watching key locations, asking off-the-record questions in
trader bars, calling in favours from friends of friends, acquaintances of
acquaintances, even one or too old adversaries. I hired trackers and
bloodhounders, and took every scent trace I could from Lyko’s apartment. I
had pheromone codes programmed into servitor skulls that I released into
up-ports and orbital stations.
I had well over a hundred personnel on my staff, many of them trained
hunters, researchers or surveillancers, but I swear the sheer load of data
would have burned out our brains.
We would have failed without Aemos. My old savant simply rose to the
challenge, never put off, never fatigued, his mind soaking in more and more
information and making a thousand mental cross checks and comparisons
every hour, tasks I couldn’t have managed in a day with a codifier engine
and a datascope.
He seemed, damn his old bones, to enjoy it.
The clues came in, one by one. A shipment of cargo put into long-term
storage in a holding house in Hive Eight and paid for by a debit transfer
from one of Lyko’s known associates. A two-second pheromone trace in the
departure halls of a commercial port down on the coast at Far Hive Beta. A
fuzzy image captured from a Munitorium pict-watcher on the streets of
Hive Primaris.
A passenger on a manifest listing making an unnecessary number of
interconnecting flights between up-ports before moving off planet, as if
trying to lose pursuit.
Then the key ones: a cursory excise exam of freight that registered the
presence of psi-baffling equipment in an off-world shipment. A series of
clumsily disguised and presumably hasty bribes to key longshoremen at the
Primaris starport. A rogue trader vessel – the Princeps Amalgum – staying a
day longer at high-anchor than it had logged permission to do, and then a
sudden change in its course plans.
Instead of a long run to the Ursoridae Reef, it was heading spinwards, via
Front’s World, to the twist farms of Eechan.
THERE WAS A knock at the room door just after dawn, and I sent everyone
except Nayl into the adjoining room. Bequin and Inshabel had the presence
of mind to scoop up all the food pails except two. I went over to the
window, and Nayl sat down in a chair, with his arm casually over the back
so anyone coming in couldn’t see the autopistol in his hand.
I focussed my mind for a moment to make sure our twist disguises were
live, and then said, ‘Enter.’
The door opened and the porcupine girl from the twist bar came in. She
was dressed in a glistening sap-cloak, and she looked at us curiously as she
pushed back her hood.
‘You take your time, twists,’ she said.
‘You got something, sweetgene, or you simply s’got to check the good
stuff you passed on last night?’ Nayl asked with a lascivious smile.
She scowled, and a head crest of spines rose in a threat posture.
‘I s’got a message. You know who from.’
‘The Phant?’ ‘I ain’t saying, genesmudge. I just bring it.’
‘Then s’bring it.’
She reached into her cloak and produced an old, low-tech tracker set,
battered and worn. Holding it up briefly, she thumbed it on long enough for
us to see the green telltale winking, and then switched it off again and
dropped it with a clatter onto the peeling tabletop.
‘S’gonna be an auction. Bidder’s market, so bring lotsa yellow, he says.
Lotsa.’
‘Where? When?’
‘Today at shift two, in the chew-after. That s’tell you where.’
‘That it?’ I asked.
‘S’all I have. I just bring it.’ She hesitated at the door. ‘You s’might
wanna make my worth while.’
I put my hand into my coat pocket and pulled out a single, large
denomination Imperial coin.
‘You take these?’
Her eyes lit up. ‘I take anything.’
I tossed it over to her and she caught it with one hand.
‘Thanks,’ she said. She went out through the door and then looked back
at us, as if my generous contribution to her immediate happiness had shifted
her opinion of us.
Which, sadly, given this miserable place, it probably had.
‘S’don’t trust him,’ she advised, then closed the door and left.
THE CHEW-AFTER was the local name given to the tracts of farmland laid
waste after the harvesters had been through. Wrecklands of shredded
vegetation that began to regrow within days of a harvest, such was the
speed and fecundity of Eechan’s floral growth. At any one time, there were
several thousand square kilometres of chew-after in the farmlands round the
mainhive.
We headed south, into the most recent areas of thresh-wake, following
the signal of the tracker.
NOON. THAT WAS what she had meant by shift two. The second shift
change of the day. We gave ourselves two hours to get there.
ON TOP OF all my speculations about Lyko, things still didn’t add up. It
had been easy enough for Nayl to identify Phant Mastik as the local slaver,
with a specialisation in mindjobs, but why was Lyko using him? Why was
Lyko selling Esarhaddon at all?
Aemos had suggested it was part of a final trade now that Esarhaddon
had completed his part of their pact. That supposed Lyko was in control,
which I doubted. And if he was simply cutting the heretic loose now the
work was done, why sell him? Why, indeed, come all this way to do that?
Inshabel supposed that maybe Lyko was now anxious to get rid of the
rogue-psyker because he was afraid of him.
I had my own theory. Lyko had brought Esarhaddon to Eechan for some
other purpose, and arranging a mock sale through the Phant was simply bait
to draw anyone who might have followed him out into the open.
As it turned out, I was right. I wasn’t surprised. It’s what I would have
done.
THE CHEW-AFTER was a miasmal waste. As far as the eye could see,
which wasn’t far at all given the clinging sap-mists from the night before,
the land was a gouged, punished ruin of ripped shoots, shredded plant-fibre,
wrenched-up root balls and pressure-flattened soil. The massive track-
marks of the harvesters had left wide ruts the depth of a man’s waist, at the
bottom of which plant material and soil was layered into a glassy flatness
like they had been set in aspic.
The misty air was wet with sap and everything was crawling with lice
motes and storm-bugs. They swarmed in the air, settled all over us, and we
could feel them in our clothes.
By then, although we maintained our twist disguises, we were all armed
and armoured at full strength. One doesn’t walk into a likely trap with a
blackpowder pistol and a sharp stick. I wore body armour, and carried my
power sword and boltpistol. The others were similarly heavy with
battlegear. If we were caught now, maintaining the pretence we were twists
would be the last of our problems.
TEN KILOMETRES SOUTH, through the swirling, sticky mists, we could hear
the chugging, rending sounds of the harvesters as they moved on their way.
Every few metres there was another bloody smear or furry pulp, the remains
of crop rodents caught in the reaping blades of the factory machines.
‘You’d think,’ said Inshabel, pausing to wipe the gooey sweat from his
face, ‘that the wildlife would have got used to the farm-factories by now.
Learned to get out of the way.’
‘Some things never learn,’ Husmaan muttered. ‘Some things always
come back to the source.’
‘He means food. He always means food,’ Nayl chuckled to me. ‘To Duj,
everything comes back to food.’
‘According to mill statistics,’ said Aemos, ‘there are four billion crop-
rats in every demitare of field space. Rivers of them flee before the
harvesters. We’ve seen one rat-corpse for every twenty-two metres, which
suggests only two-point-two per cent of them were unlucky enough to be
caught in the blades. That means the vast percentage fled. They’re smarter
than you think.’
He paused. Everyone had stopped and was staring at him.
‘What?’ he asked. What? I was only saying...’
‘That old geezer fantisises about maths and stats more’n I fantisise about
the lay-dies,’ Nayl told Bequin as we moved forward again.
‘I’m not sure which of you I’m supposed to feel more sorry for,’ she said.
HUSMAAN HELD UP the tracker the Porcupine-girl had given us and shook
it. Then he slapped it a couple of times for good measure.
We waded through the plant fibre and came level with him.
‘Problem?’ I asked.
‘Damn thing... too old.’
‘Let me see it.’
Husmaan handed it to me. It was a piece of crap, all right. Battered by a
lifetime of hard knocks, with a nearly flat powercell. A nice touch that, I
thought, noting Lyko’s careful planning. An unreliable tracker made this
seem so much more genuine. A brand new or well-powered unit would
have been as good as a written invitation beginning ‘Dear people chasing
me, please come here and get killed’.
I shook the device myself and got a good return. Just enough juice to lead
us to our deaths.
‘That way,’ I said.
IT WAS CLOSE to noon. The sun was up, but the sap-mists hadn’t
dissipated. We were bathed in a warm, yellow, filmy glare. According to the
tracker, we were about half a kilometre from the auction site.
‘They’re expecting me and Nayl, so we’ll go in with Bequin,’ I wanted
an untouchable close to me. ‘Inshabel, cut east with Aemos. Husmaan,
west. Covering positions. Don’t move in unless you hear me vox a direct
command. Understand?’
The three nodded.
‘If you find anything, keep it Glossia and keep it brief. Go.’
Nathun Inshabel armed his lascarbine and moved away to the left with
Aemos along a harvester track-bed, leaving tacky footprints in the glassy,
crashed residue at the bottom of the huge rat. Husmaan’s hempcloth-
wrapped long-las was already armed. He darted away to the right, quickly
lost in the mist.
‘Shall we?’ I said to Bequin and Nayl.
‘After you,’ Nayl grinned.
I made one last command by vox, in Glossia code, and we trudged into
the ripped thickets of the chew-after.
THE PHANT’S PEOPLE had used flamers to clear a wide space in the morass
of the chew-over. We could smell the burnt pulp-fibre from several dozen
metres away.
The mist was still close, but I could make out several crop-runner trucks,
skimmers and land speeders parked in the blackened clearing. People
bustled around them.
‘WHAT DO YOU see?’ I asked Nayl.
He played his magnoculars round again. ‘Phant... and his twist cronies.
The horned guy, and that eyeball creep. Maybe a dozen, some of whom
think they’re hidden around the perimeter. Plus the prospective buyers. I
make... three... no, four, all hive-types, with minders. Sixteen other bodies,
all told.’
I yanked up my hood. ‘Come on.’
‘There’s an alarm strand round the site.’
‘We’ll trip it. That’s what it’s there for.’
THE ALARM STRAND was an ankle-high wire-cord tied taut between the
churned root clumps. Every metre or so, the air-dried shell case of a storm
bug was carefully tied to it, forming a little, hollow-sounding bell. They
rattled and jangled as we deliberately plucked the wire.
In a moment, ragged-robed twist muscle loomed out of the murdered
undergrowth, aiming matchlocks and blades at us.
‘We’re s’here for the auction,’ I told them, holding up Phant’s tracker.
‘S’invited.’
‘Name?’ croaked a frog-headed thing with a crossbow and a spittle
problem.
‘Eye-gor, from off. With his twists.’
Frog-head waved us into the site. The others assembled before the low,
flak-board stage on which Phant Mastik stood, looking round at us.
‘Eye-gor! Off-world twist, with two others,’ Frog-head announced.
Phant nodded his heavy, tusked head and Frog-head and his men backed
off, putting up their weapons.
++S’glad you could make it, twist++
‘You the Phant. You the twist with the stuff. But... I s’hear my own name
loud, not these others.’
++Let’s all be known, then the sale can begin++
Phant looked down at the other buyers. One, a stunning female up-spire
hiver in a tight bodyglove nodded. ‘Frovys Vassik,’ she said through a pan-
lingual servitor-skull drone that floated at her shoulder.
She was clearly speaking some high-caste dialect cant which the drone
was translating. I assayed her and her two male bodyguards quickly:
Dilettante wealthers, would-be cultist types, well-armed and armoured with
all the wargear spire money could afford.
‘Merdok,’ said the next, a frail, white-suited, elderly man leaning on a
cane and wiping perspiration from his brow with a japanagar lace kerchief
that had cost more than the lowly Phant’s entire outfit. He had four minders,
squat females in rubberised war-rena suits, each with an electronic slave-
leash collar around her throat.
‘Tanselman Fybes,’ said the bland-faced man to Merdok’s left, stepping
forward with a courteous nod. He was dressed in a bright orange cooler-
suit, with large, articulated exchanger vanes sprouting from his shoulders.
His breath smoked in the personal veil of cold air the suit was generating
around him.
He was also alone, which made him instantly more dangerous than the
hive retards who had brought muscle.
‘You may address me as Erotik,’ said the last, a bitch-faced crone who
had inadvisably wedged her ancient body into a close-fitting, spiked, black
bodyglove, the mark of a death-cultist.
Or would be death-cultist, I thought. She had five masked and harnessed
slaves with her, all of them sweating in the misty heat. I saw at once they
were out of their depth. They played at death-cult, up in the eyries of the
mainhive, maybe cutting their skin and drinking blood once in a while. The
closest they had come to a real death-cult was watching some blurry, fake
snuff-pict to impress their friends after a banquet.
‘S’greet you all. I’m Eye-gor. S’off world, and twisted as they come.’
I bowed. Fybes and Vassik returned the motion. Merdok mopped his
brow and Erotik gestured a very ham-fisted sign of the True Death which
nearly made Nayl laugh out loud.
‘Can we get started, my friend Phant?’ Merdok asked, dabbing his
kerchief around the sweat runs on his face. ‘It’s midday and bloody hot out
here.’
‘And I have murders to do and blood to drink!’ Erotik cried. Her plump
and unhealthy minders oohed and aahed and tried to get their nipple-spikes
and bondage straps comfortable.
‘Oh dear God-Emperor... they’re never going to make it out alive...’
whispered Bequin.
‘More fool them...’ I whispered back.
PHANT’S MEN USED force-poles and electrolashes to goad the sale item
from the back of a crop-runner track onto the stage. It was a rangy human,
straitjacketed and blindfolded, with a heavy psychic-damper muzzle
buckled around his head.
++Alpha-plus quality. One only. S’bids, now?’++
‘Ten bars!’ cried Erotik at once.
‘Twenty,’ said Vassik.
‘Twenty-five!’ cried Merdok.
Fybes cleared his throat. His cough blew cold steam out from the private
atmosphere generated by his suit. ‘I think that’s established the common
level here. I do hate mixing with proles. One thousand bars.’
Erotik and her minders gasped.
Merdok looked pale.
Vassik glanced round at Fybes with a curt look.
‘Ahh. At least someone sees the true worth of the item on sale. Good. We
can begin serious bidding.’ Vassik cleared her throat and her cyber-skull
dutifully issued white noise. ‘Twelve hundred bars,’ she said.
‘Thirteen hundred!’ Erotik cried out, desperately.
‘Fifteen,’ said Merdok. ‘My best offer. I had no idea this meet would be
so hungry... or so rich.’
‘Two thousand,’ said Vassik’s hovering skull.
‘Three,’ said Fybes.
Merdok was already shaking his head. Erotik was walking away towards
the edge of the site, complaining loudly to her pudgy sex-toys, who bustled
around her.
‘Three five,’ said Vassik.
‘Four,’ said Fybes.
‘Anything?’ I whispered to Bequin.
‘Not even the slightest latent push. But those baffles could be doing their
job.’
‘So it could be Esarhaddon?’
‘Yes. I doubt it. But it could.’
‘Nayl?’
Harlon Nayl looked round at me.
‘Nothing. The Phant’s minders are getting edgy because the old witch
and her sad hump-muffins are trying to leave before the auction’s finished.
But nothing else...’
‘Five five,’ Vassik’s servitor-skull rasped.
‘Six,’ said Fybes.
Merdok had withdrawn to one side of the site with his minders, and was
taking a sustaining puff of obscura from a portable water-pipe one of the
war-rena slave ferns was holding for him. Erotik and her chubby
concubines were arguing with Horn-head and another couple of twists on
the other side of the burned acre.
‘Eight five!’ Vassik was announcing.
‘Nine!’ returned Fybes.
‘Fifty!’ I said quietly, tossing a huge pile of ingots down onto the stained
soil.
There was a pause. A long, damned pause.
++Fifty bid++
Phant looked down at us all.
Merdok and Erotik and all their people were simply dumbstruck. Vassik
turned away, screaming, and her minders had to hold her down as she went
into fits of rage.
Fybes just looked at me, his breath coming slow and short in clouds.
‘Fifty?’ he said.
‘S’fifty, count ’em. You got better?’
‘What if I have, Eye-gor? And please... stop it with the “s’stupid s’twist”
talk. It’s getting on my nerves.’
Fybes walked towards me. He reached up and pulled his face off. The
flesh disintegrated like gossamer as he pulled it away, revealing his blank,
piercing eyes.
‘Oh, Gregor. You do so like to make an entrance, don’t you?’ said
Cherubael.
ELEVEN
Face to face.
No witnesses.
Death along the line.
HIS WAS THE last face I had expected to see here, though it had been in
my mind and my nightmares for nearly a hundred years.
‘It’s been a while, hasn’t it, Gregor?’ the daemonhost said softly, almost
cordially. ‘I’ve thought of you often, fondly. You bested me on 56-Izar. I...
held a grudge for a while, I must admit. But when I learned you had
survived after all, I was quite delighted. It meant there would be a chance
for us to meet again.’
The orange cooler-suit began to burn and collapse off him in molten
hanks until he was naked. He rose gently, arms by his side, like a dancer,
and hovered on the wind a few metres above the churned soil. He was still
tall, and powerfully made, but the aura that shone from him was more
sickly green than the gold I remembered.
Unhealthy bulging veins corded his body, and the nub-horns on his brow
had grown into short, twisted hooks.
‘And so we meet again. Aren’t you going to say anything?’
I could feel Bequin shaking in terror beside me.
‘Stay calm, stay still,’ I told her.
The daemonhost glanced at her and his smile widened. ‘The untouchable!
How wonderful! An almost exact repeat of our first encounter. How are
you, my dear?’
‘What do you want?’ I asked.
‘Want?’
‘You always want something. On 56-Izar, it was the Necroteuch. Oh, I
forgot. You never want anything, do you? You’re just a slave, doing
another’s bidding.’
Cherubael frowned slightly. ‘Don’t be uncivil, Gregor. You should
treasure the fact that I have taken a personal interest in you. Most things
that cross me get destroyed very quickly. I could have hunted you out years
ago. But I knew... there was a bond.’
‘More of your riddles. More nothings. Tell me something real. Tell me
about Vogel Passionata.’
He laughed, an ugly sound. ‘Oh, you heard about, that did you?’
‘Reports of the incident have made me suspect in the eyes of many.’
‘I know. Bless you, that wasn’t my intention. It was just a tiny error on
my part. I’m sorry if it’s inconvenienced you.’
‘I have no wish to be seen as a man who would form a compact with
daemons.’
‘I’m sure you haven’t. But that is what’s happening, whether you like it
or not. Destiny, Gregor. Our destinies are entwined, in ways you cannot
even begin to see. Why else would you dream about me?’
‘Because it has become a central goal of my life to hunt you down and
banish you.’
‘Oh, this is a lot more than simple professional obsession. Think, why do
you really dream of me? Why do you search for me so diligently, even
hiding the extent of that search from your masters?’
‘I...’ My mind was racing. This thing knew so much.
‘And why did I spare you? If it had been you on Vogel Passionata, I
would have let you live. I let you live on Thracian.’
‘What?’
‘You stopped to pay homage at Spatian’s tomb, and the Gate shielded you
from the disaster. Why did you stop? You don’t know. You can’t explain it,
can you? It was me. Watching over you. Planting the suggestion in your
mind. Making you pause for no reason. We’ve been working together all
along.’
‘No!’
‘You know it, Gregor. You just don’t know you know it.’
CHERUBAEL FLOATED AWAY a short distance, and looked around. The
auction site was frozen, all eyes on him. No one dared move, not even the
most weak-willed twist guard. Even those present who didn’t know what he
was recognised the extraordinary evil and power he represented.
‘What are you waiting for?’ a voice yelled from nearby. Several armed
men stepped out of their cover in the chew-after tangles and approached. It
was Lyko, with six gristly examples of hired muscle.
‘Look who I found, Lyko. I sprang this trap, just like you suggested, to
discover if anyone was on your tail, and look who it turned out to be.’
‘Eisenhorn...’ Lyko murmured, fear crossing his face for a second. He
looked over at Cherubael.
‘I said, what are you waiting for? Kill them and we can be gone.’
It was suddenly clear to me Lyko wasn’t the daemonhost’s master. Like
Konrad Molitor all those years before, Lyko was another pawn, a corrupted
agent of someone... something... else.
‘Must I?’ asked the hovering figure.
‘Do it! No witnesses!’
‘Please!’ cried the elderly Merdok. ‘We only meant t—’
Lyko whipped around and incinerated the old man with his plasma gun.
That broke the impasse. Phant’s people and the other buyers broke in
panic, drawing weapons, shouting. Indiscriminate shooting began. Lyko’s
gunmen, all ex-military types with autocannons, hosed the staging area and
cut down the fleeing twists. I saw Phant Mastik hit by a burst of fire and
collapse in rough sections backwards off the platform.
His horn-headed minder ran at Cherubael, firing a grubby old laspistol.
Cherubael hadn’t moved. He was simply watching the murder around
him. The las-shots sizzled off his skin, and he glanced down at the twist, as
if his reverie had been broken.
The daemonhost didn’t even move a hand, a finger. There was just a
slight nod in the direction of the horned minder, and the miserable twist was
somehow filleted where he stood, waves of fire stripping off his flesh and
popping out his skeleton, parts of it still articulated.
I felt the warp churning around that dismal place as Cherubael went to
work. Once he had started, his fury was unstinting. Merdok’s war-rena ferns
disappeared in a sudden vortex and died, fused together. The mud beneath
Vassik’s feet boiled, and she and her bodyguards sank, screaming and
thrashing, into it.
I was frozen, rigid. I felt Bequin pulling at me.
Shots seared past my face. I snapped round, and saw two of Lyko’s men
charging us. One dropped suddenly, headshot by what could only have been
a sniping round from Husmaan out in the torn undergrowth.
Nayl flew past me and gunned the other down with his Tronsvasse
parabellum.
‘Come on! We’ve got to get out of here!’ he yelled at me.
There was blood and filth and swirling plant-fibre in the air. A warp
storm was crackling around us, so dense and dark we could barely see,
barely stand against its churning force. But I could make out the glowing
shape of Cherubael through it all.
I drew my power sword and ran towards him.
‘Gregor! No!’ Bequin screamed.
I had no choice. I had waited the best part of a hundred years. I would not
let him go again.
He floated around to face me, smiling down.
‘Put that away, Gregor. Don’t worry. I won’t kill you. Lyko has no power
over me. I’ll deal with his complaints later, and—’
‘Who does have power over you? Who is your master? Tell me! You
caused the atrocity on Thracian, didn’t you! Why? On whose orders?’
‘Just go away, Gregor. This is not your concern now. Go away.’
I think he was honestly surprised when I hacked the power sword into his
chest.
I don’t really know if I had imagined I could do him any harm.
The blessed blade almost disembowelled him before it exploded and
hurled me backwards.
He looked down in dismay at the wound across his torso. Warp energies,
bright and toxic, were spilling out of it. In a second, the wound closed as if
it had never been.
‘You little fool,’ said Cherubael.
I found myself flying backwards through the air, blood in my mouth.
The impact of landing shook my bones and smashed the breath out of
me. My head swam. The daemonhost’s power had thrown me a good thirty
metres across the site, into the underbrush.
Furious psychic detonations went off all round. Screaming, semi-sentient
winds from the deepest warp snaked around the field, destroying the last of
the twists and the fleeing buyers.
I tried to rise, but consciousness left me.
WHEN I CAME to, the chew-after was on fire. There was no sign of
Cherubael. Inshabel and Aemos were pulling me to my feet.
‘Bequin! Nayl!’ I coughed.
‘I’ll find them,’ Inshabel said.
‘Where’s Lyko?’ I asked Aemos, as Inshabel ran off, weapon drawn.
‘Fled, with his men, in two of the land speeders.’
‘And the daemonhost?’
‘I don’t know. It seemed to just vanish. Maybe it had a displacer field.’
I started to ran back into the site, though my body was burning with pain.
Aemos cried out after me.
MOST OF THE vehicles were smashed or overturned, but a couple were
still intact.
I scrambled into a small, black speeder; a sleek, up-hive sports model
that had presumably belonged to Vassik. I cued the thrusters, lifting off
before I’d even strapped on the seat harness.
The craft was powerful and over-responsive. It took a moment to master
the lightness of touch needed to accelerate without sudden blurts of speed. I
turned it unsteadily in the air as I climbed too fast above the blasted site.
Below, I could see Nayl, ragged and bloody, shouting up at me to come
back.
Banking out of the cone of smoke at a hundred metres, I got my hearings.
On every side, the acreage of the chew-after spread out until it became lush
greencover again. There was the mainhive, looming in the distance. Where
were they? Where were they?
I saw two dots in the air three kilometres to the west and gunned the
machine after them. Heavy land speeders, making towards the bulk of the
nearest harvester factory.
I pushed the turbines to their limit, coming in low and fast behind the
slower lift-machines. I knew they’d seen me the moment autofire chattered
back in my direction, wildly off target.
I began to jink, the way Midas had taught me, before they got their aim
in. I thought about shooting back at them, but it took both hands on the stick
just to keep the sports speeder level.
We were passing over green crop land now, an emerald sea that raced
away below in an alarming blur. More tracer shots howled back past me.
A big shadow passed across the sun.
‘Want them splashed?’ crackled from the vox.
Downjets flaring, the streamlined bulk of my gun-cutter settled in beside
me, matching my speed. It seemed huge compared to my insignificant little
speeder; one-fifty tonnes, eighty metres from beak nose to finned tail,
landing gear lowered like insect legs. I could see Medea grinning in the
cockpit.
I daren’t lift my hands from the jarring stick to activate the vox.
Instead, I opened my mind directly to hers.
Only if you have to. Try and get them to land.
‘Ow!’ answered the vox. ‘Warn me next time you’re gonna do that.’
The great bulk of the cutter suddenly surged forward, afterburners
incandescent and landing gear raising, and banked away to the right. Its
thrust wake wobbled me hard. I watched it turn out in a wide semi-circle,
low over the crops, furrowing them with its downwash. It looked like a vast
bird of prey swooping round for the kill.
With its interplanetary thrust-tunnels, it easily outstripped the racing
speeders, and came in towards them, head on.
I felt a surge of psychic-power. My enemies had nothing but their minds
with which to combat the gun-cutter.
The cutter suddenly broke left, dipped and then righted itself. They’d got
to Medea, if only for a moment.
She was angry now. I could tell that simply from the way she flew. With
a wail of braking jets, she turned the cutter on a stall-hover as the speeders
flashed past.
The chin-turret crackled, and heavy-gauge munitions tore the second of
the two speeders into a shower of flames in the air.
Hitting the throttle, I zipped in behind the hovering gun-cutter, chasing
down the other speeder.
No more! I sent to Medea. I want them alive if possible!
The remaining speeder was close ahead now. I could feel Lyko’s mind
aboard it.
He was closing on the armoured bulk of the harvester, which now
dominated the landscape ahead. It was a giant, six hundred metres long and
ninety high at the peak of its humped, beetle-back. It was kicking a vast
wake of sap-spray and smoke out behind it. The rattle of its threshing
blades was audible above the scream of my speeder’s engines.
My quarry dipped, and flew in along the spine of the huge factory
machine, heading for a rear-facing docking hangar raised like a wart on the
hull’s back. Warning hails were beeping at me over the speeder’s vox-set,
the alarmed challenges of the harvester.
The heavy speeder braked hard and landed badly in the mouth of the
docking hangar. Turning in to follow it, I saw figures scrambling out. They
disappeared, into the hangar, all except one man, who dropped to his knees
on the approach slip and began firing back at me with his autocannon.
Streams of high-velocity rounds whipped past on either side. Then a
bunch of them went into my port intake with a clattering roar that shook the
speeder and threw shards of casing out in a belch of sparks.
Warning lights lit up across the control board.
I dropped ten metres, put the nose in.
And bailed.
I BROKE MY left wrist and four ribs hitting the topside of the harvester.
With hindsight, I was lucky not to have been killed outright, lucky even to
have hit the harvester’s hull at all. It was a long way down. I managed to
grab a stanchion cable as I began to slither down, and wrapped my right
arm around it.
My speeder glanced once off the approach slip, and bounced up again,
tail up, beginning to tear apart. Trailing debris, the machine cartwheeled in,
vaporised the gunman, hit Lyko’s parked land speeder, and shunted it right
into the hangar, which exploded a second later in a sheet of fire and metal.
I limped along the approach slip, sidestepping chunks of burning
wreckage, and climbed over the smashed, smouldering speeders into the
hangar. Impact klaxons were rasping out, and automatic fire-fighting sprays
were still squirting out dribbles of retardant foam.
At the back of the hangar, a hatch was half open, next to the cages of the
service and cargo elevators.
I pushed through the hatch. A metal staircase descended into the factory.
At the bottom, it opened out into a companionway that ran the length of the
harvester. Stunned work-crews, most of them twists in sap-stained overalls,
gazed at me.
I produced my rosette.
‘Imperial Inquisition. Where did they go?’
‘Who?’
‘Where did they go?’ I snarled, enforcing my will without restraint.
The effect was so powerful, none of them could speak, and several
passed out. All the others pointed down the companionway towards the
head of the factory.
Another hatch, another staircase. The noise of the internal threshers was
now shudderingly loud. I came down into the vast internal work line, a long
chamber that ran the length of the harvester. It was a huge, deafening place,
the air thick with sap mist. A massive processing conveyor carried the
harvested produce along from the reaping blades at the harvester’s mouth,
at a rate of several tonnes every second. Twist workers in masks and aprons
worked the front part of the line with chaintools and cutting lances which
were attached to overhead power systems by thick rubber-trunked hoses.
They sorted and cut the larger sections of root and stalk before the crop
went through the great vicing rollers and stamping presses into the
macerating vats further back down the factory.
With the alarms sounding and warning lights flashing, the line had come
to a halt, and the workers were looking around, liquid cellulose and sap
dripping off their gauntlets, overalls and work tools.
I blundered through them, overseers shouting at me from gantry stations
far above. I could see Lyko, thirty metres away down the line, pushing
through with one last gunman and a bound, visored figure that could only
be Esarhaddon.
The gunmen turned and fired at me down the length of the line vault.
Three workers crumpled, one spilling over onto the belt. The shots spanged
sparks off the metal walkways and machinery.
As the other workers dived for cover, I dropped to my knee and reached
for my boltgun. It wasn’t there. In fact, the entire holster was ripped open. I
wasn’t sure when I lost it: during Cherubael’s assault or slamming off the
hull of the harvester, but it was long gone. And my beloved power sword
had been disintegrated on contact with the daemonhost.
More shots whizzed down the work-line and dented the metal facings of
the belt-drivers. I crawled into cover behind a drum of hydrobac tool-wash.
I pulled my back-up weapon from the ankle-holster built into the side of
my boot. It was a compact, short-frame auto with a muzzle so short it barely
extended beyond the trigger guard. The handgrip was actually longer than
the barrel, and contained a slide-magazine of twenty small-calibre rounds.
Selecting single-fire, I cracked off a couple of shots. The aim was lousy
and the power poor. It really was meant to be a close-range last ditch.
The gunman down the line, undeterred by my pathetic display, switched
over to full auto and raked the deck area and working space beside the
stationary belt. Workers, all pressing themselves into cover, began to
scream and yell.
The shooting stopped. I dared a look out. There was a clunk and a whirr
and the conveyor started moving again.
The gunman was following his departing master again. Lyko was almost
out of sight, pushing his captive ahead of him.
Why was Esarhaddon a captive, I wondered? I still didn’t understand the
relationship between Lyko, the psyker and Cherubael.
I RAN ON. The gunman, Lyko and his captive psyker had all disappeared
through a bulkhead door. To follow them, I’d have to go in blind. And if I’d
been in Lyko’s place, I’d have used the bulkhead as a point to turn and wait.
My gut readings of his actions had not been wrong so far.
I leapt up onto the wide conveyor belt, ignoring the shouts of the
cowering work crew, and slithered across it through the matted, sticky crop
load. The sap and the moving belt made it nigh on impossible to stay
upright. For a moment, I thought I might slip and be carried along under the
nearest roller press.
I leapt off the far side onto the solid deck, dripping with green mush and
vegetal fluid. Now I was following the work-line down the other side of the
wide conveyor, which divided the harvester centrally.
There was a bulkhead door on this side, too.
I went through it, low.
The gunman was waiting behind the other door on the far side of the
moving belt. He saw me, cursed, and turned with his autocannon. I was
firing already. Even at this shorter range, the pathetic stopping power of my
auto was evident. His drum-barrelled autocannon was about to roar out my
doom.
I dived headlong, thumbing my weapon to auto and ripped off the entire
clip of small slugs in a shrill, high-pitched chatter.
What I lacked in power I made up for in numbers. I hit him six or seven
times in the left arm and collar and staggered him backwards, his bonded
armour torn open. The heavy cannon flew out of his hands and landed on
the moving belt between us to be carried out of view.
He was far from dead, though he was bleeding profusely from the
multiple small calibre grazes and impacts. He was probably glanding some
stimm that kept his edge.
Snarling a Necromundan oath, he drew a military-issue las-pistol from
his webbing, and climbed up on the work-line foot rail on his side of the
rolling belt to get a better angle at me. I threw the empty gun at him and
made him duck, and then grabbed one of the hose-suspended work lances
hanging by the line-edge.
He got off a shot that barely missed my shoulder. I swung the lance at
him, the chain-blade tip chittering, reaching out across the belt. But it was
hard to manipulate it with one wrist smashed.
So I turned the swing into a throw and launched the long tool like a
harpoon.
The chain-tip impaled him and he died still screaming and trying to drag
the industrial cutter from his chest. As he went limp, the tension in the
rubberised power-hose pulled the lance back towards its rest hook on my
side of the line, dragging the body onto the conveyor. The belt carried it
along as far as the hose would allow, and then it stuck fast, the belt moving
under it.
Piles of wet plant fibre began damming up against it and spilling over
onto the floor.
Eisenhorn, a voice said in my mind.
I wheeled round and saw Lyko standing on a grilled gantry that formed a
walk-bridge over the belt. The plasma gun he had used to burn the fake
Esarhaddon was aimed at me. I could see the battered psyker, his head still
masked and visored, lashed to a wall-pipe on the far side of the line.
You should have left well alone, Eisenhorn. You should never have come
after me.
I’m doing my job, you bastard. What were you doing?
What had to be done. What needs to be done.
He came down the walk-bridge and stepped towards me. There was a
hunted, terrified look in his face.
And what needs to be done?
Silence.
Why, Lyko? The atrocity on Thracian... how could you have allowed
that? Been part of it?
I... I didn’t know! I didn’t know what they were going to do.
Who?
He squashed my cheek with the muzzle of his potent weapon.
‘No more,’ he said, speaking for the first time.
‘If you’re going to kill me, just do it. I’m surprised you haven’t already.’
‘I need to know something first. Who knows? Who knows what you
know?’
‘About you and your little pact with the daemonscum? About your theft
of an alpha-plus class psyker? That you stood by while millions died on
Thracian? Hah!’ Everyone. I added the answer psychically for emphasis.
Everyone. I informed Rorken and Orsini himself before I left on your trail.
‘No! There would have been more than just you after me...’
‘There is.’
‘You’re lying! You’re alone...’
You’re doomed.
He stormed his mind into mine, frantic to tear the truth out of me. I think
he was truly realising how far into damnation he had cast himself.
I blocked his feverish mind-assault, and countered, driving an augur of
psychic rage into his hind brain. It was in there. I could feel it. His true
master. The face, the name...
He realised what I was doing, realised that I outclassed him psychically.
He tried to shoot me with his plasma gun, but by then I had shut down his
nervous system and blocked all autonomous function. I scoured his mind.
He was frozen, helpless, unable to stop me ransacking his memory, despite
the blocks and engram locks he had placed there. Or someone had.
There. There. The answer.
He uttered an agonised, oddly modulated scream.
Lyko tumbled away from me.
Cherubael hovered above us, high in the roof space of the factory
chamber, casting a glow of filthy warp-light.
Choking, twitching, his limbs limp, Lyko was rising up towards him.
Smoke was coming out of his mouth and nostrils.
‘Now, now, Gregor,’ Cherubael said. ‘Nice try, but there are some secrets
that must remain.’
With a nod of his head, he tossed Lyko aside. The traitor-inquisitor flew
down to the front of the factory space, bounced hard off the inner hull and
then fell down into the churning reaper blades in the factory harvester’s
maw.
His body was utterly disintegrated.
Cherubael hovered lower, grabbed the comatose, bound form of
Esarhaddon like a child picking up a doll.
‘I won’t forget what you did,’ said the daemonhost, looking back at me
one last time. ‘You’ll have to make it up to me.’
Then he was gone, and Esarhaddon was gone with him.
TWELVE
At Cadia, by terce.
The pylons.
Talking with Neve.
A BITTER AUTUMN wind was coming down off the moors, and the turning
ribbon-leaves of the axeltrees were beginning to fall. They fluttered past me
like dry strands of black kelp, and collected in slowly decomposing drifts
on the windward side of the graves and the low stone walls.
Above, the overcast sky was full of racing brown clouds.
I followed the old, overgrown path up the wooded slope, under the
hissing axeltrees, and stood for a while alone, looking down at the wide
grave field and the little shrine tower that watched over it. There was no
sign of life, and, apart from the wind, no movement. Even the air-shay that
had brought me here from the landing fields at Kasr Tyrok had departed. I
almost missed the driver’s grumbles that the place was so far out of town.
Far away, almost out of sight beyond the glowering moors, I saw the
nearest of the famed, mysterious pylons, an angular silhouette. Even from
this distance, I could hear the strange, moaning note the wind made as it
blew through the pylons’ geometries, geometries that thousands of years of
human scholarship had failed to explain.
This was my first time on the world they called the Gatehouse of the
Imperium. So far, it was not endearing itself to me.
‘So, Thorn... you were none too sharp, were you?’
I turned slowly. He had arrived behind me, as silent as the void itself.
‘Well?’ he asked. ‘What time do you call this?’
‘I consider myself suitably chastened,’ I said.
He was impassive, then the scar under his milky eye twitched and he
smiled. ‘Welcome to Cadia, Eisenhorn,’ said Fischig.
ASIDE FROM AEMOS, Godwyn Fischig was my longest serving
companion, though he and Bequin often disputed that record. I’d met them
both on Hubris, during my hunt for the Chaos-broker Eyclone, which led in
turn to the whole bloody affair of the Necroteuch.
I’d actually encountered Fischig first. He’d then been a chastener in the
local arbites, ordered to keep a watch on me. He became my ally through
circumstance. Bequin had crossed my path, if my memory serves, about a
day later, but I had co-opted her almost directly into my service, while
Fischig had remained, technically, a serving arbites officer for some
considerable time before resigning to join me.
Which is why Bequin claimed the prize, and why they sometimes fell to
disputing it when the hour was late and the amasec unstoppered.
His was a big man, of my own age, his cropped blond hair now turning
silver. But he was as robust as ever, clad in a coat of black fur, a mail sur-
coat and steel-fronted boots.
He shook my hand.
‘I was beginning to think you wouldn’t make it.’
‘I was beginning to think so too.’
He cocked his head slightly. ‘Trouble?’
‘Like you wouldn’t believe. Let’s walk and I’ll tell you.’
WE WANDERED BACK down the tree-shrouded path together. He knew
something of the atrocity on Thracian, which was by then some seven
months past, but he had no idea I had been caught up in it.
When I told him the details, especially about Ravenor, his face darkened.
He had admired Gideon – frankly, it had been difficult not to admire
Gideon – and I sometimes felt that Gideon was the man Fischig would have
liked to have been.
Fischig’s great strength was his self-knowledge. He understood his own
limitations. His strengths were loyalty, physical power, fine combat skills,
observation and a nose for detail. He was not quick witted, and his
abhorrence of book-learning meant that even the rank of interrogator was
beyond him. Though he would have loved to rise formally through the
ranks of the Inquisition, he had never tried, contenting himself with
becoming one of the fundamental components of my staff.
To try, he knew, would have meant failure. And Godwyn Fischig hated to
fail.
WE CROSSED THE narrow funeral lane and went into the grave field by the
old lychgate in the low wall. I told him about Lyko, and Esarhaddon. I told
him of the warnings from Endor and Lord Rorken. I told him about the
bloody, inconclusive mess on Eechan. I told him about Cherubael.
‘I would have come as soon as I received your message. But Rorken
practically forbade me. And then, as you have heard, matters got out of
hand.’
He nodded. ‘Don’t worry, I’m a patient man.’
We stood for a moment in the middle of the vast field of graves. Several
shivering priests in ragged black robes were wandering through the lines of
crumbling gravestones, pausing to study each one.
‘What are they doing?’
‘Reading the names,’ he said.
‘What for?’
‘To see if they can be read.’
‘Okay... why?’
‘As you might imagine, a martial world like this produces many dead.
Long ago, an edict was made by the planetary government that only certain
fields of land could ever be used for burial. So cemetery space is at an
optimum. Hence, the Law of Decipherability.’
‘Which is?’
‘The law states that once the eroding hands of time and the elements have
made the last names on a field’s gravestones illegible, the anonymous dead
may be exhumed, the bones buried in a pit, and the field reused.’
‘So they tend the field for years until the names can no longer be read?’
He shrugged. ‘It’s their way. Once the names have vanished, so has the
memory, and so has any need for honour. The time’s coming for this place.
Another year or two, they tell me.’
That struck me as infinitely melancholic. Cadia was a warrior-world,
standing guard in the one navigable approach to the warp-tumult of the
infamous Eye of Terror. The region, known as the Cadian Gate, is the route
of choice for invasions of Chaos, and Cadia is seen by most as the
Imperium’s first line of defence. It has bred elite troops since it was first
colonised, and billions of its sons and daughters have died bravely
protecting our culture.
Died bravely... then left to slowly vanish in the desolate fields of their
home world.
It was dismal, but probably entirely in keeping with the stoic martial
mindset of the Cadians.
FISCHIG PUSHED OPEN the heavy axelwood door of the shrine tower and
we went inside out of the wind.
The tower was a single chamber, a drum of stone, with weep-hole
window slits high up near the summit. A circle of rough wooden pews was
arranged around a central altarpiece, above which a massive iron candelabra
in the form of a double-headed eagle was suspended on a chain from the
beamed roof.
On this dark autumn day, the light from the votive candles fixed amongst
the metal feathers of the aquila’s unfurled wings was the only illumination.
There was a spare, thin, golden light, an atmosphere of frugality and
numinous grace. And a musty stink of rotting axel leaves.
WE SAT TOGETHER on a pew, both of us briefly honouring the altar with
the sign of the aquila, our hands splayed together against our hearts.
‘It’s strange,’ sighed Fischig after a long pause. ‘You sent me out, over a
year ago, on yet another quest for signs of that daemonspawn Cherubael.
And just when I find a trace, you run into him again, on the other side of the
damn sector.’
‘Strange is possibly not the word I’d use.’
‘But the coincidence. Is it coincidence?’
‘I don’t know. It seems so much like it. But... that thing... Cherubael...
disarms me so.’
‘Naturally, old friend.’
I shook my head. ‘Not because of his power. Not that.’
‘Then what?’
‘The way he speaks to me. The way he says he’s using me.’
‘Daemon guile!’
‘Perhaps. But he knows so much. He knows... ah, damn it! He speaks as
if our destinies are irrevocably entwined. Like he matters to me and vice
versa.’
‘He does matter to you.’
‘I know, I know. As my goal. My prey. My nemesis. But he talks like it’s
more than that. Like he can see the future, or can read it, or has even been
there. He talks to me like... he knows what I’m going to do.’
Fischig frowned. ‘And... what do you think that might be?’
I rose and stalked to the altar. ‘I have no idea! I can’t conceive of doing
anything that would please or benefit a daemon! I can’t ever imagine myself
that insane!’
‘Trust me, Eisenhorn, if I ever thought you were, I’d shoot you myself.’
I glanced back at him. ‘Please do.’
I halted and looked up into the flickering flames of the candles, seeing
the many shadows and possible shadows of myself they cast, interlapping
and criss-crossing the stone floor. Like the myriad possibilities of the future.
I tried not to look into the thicker, blacker shadows.
‘The warp-spawned bastard’s just playing games with you,’ said Fischig.
That’s all it is. Games to put you off the scent and keep you at bay.’
‘If that’s the case, why does he keep saving my life?’
WE WENT BACK out into the moorland wind. The moaning of the pylon
seemed louder to me now.
‘Who’s with you?’ Fischig asked.
‘Aemos, Bequin, Nayl, Medea, Husmaan... and a lad you’ve not met,
Inshabel. We came here directly from Eechan.’
‘Long ride?’
‘Best part of six months. We got as far as Mordia on a free trader called
the Best of Eagles, and then came the rest of the way as guests of the
Adeptus Mechanicus. The super-heavy barge Mons Olympus, no less,
carrying virgin Titans to the garrisons of the Cadian Gate.’
‘Quite an honour.’
‘The inquisitor’s rosette carries its benefits. But I tell you, the tech-priests
of Mars are damned surly company for a two month voyage. I would have
gone mad but for Bequin’s regicide tournaments.’
‘Nayl getting any better?’
‘No. I think by now he owes me... what is it? Hmm. His first born and his
soul.’
Fischig laughed.
‘Oh, it wasn’t all so bad. There was one fellow, a veteran princeps from
the Titan Legion. Old guy, centuries old. At the point of retirement, like
those men ever retire. He was supervising the transfer of the new war-
machines. Name of Hekate. We got to drinking some nights. Remind me to
tell you some of his war-stories.’
‘I will. Come on...’
He had a land speeder parked down off the lane under the swaying axel-
trees. We brushed fallen ribbon-leaves off the hood and got in.
‘Let me show you what I found. Then we can all meet and greet in a safe
place.’
‘How safe?’
‘The safest.’
WE FLEW OVER the moorlands, into the biting winds, hugging the terrain.
The light was fading. The grim glory of Cadia was spread out below us.
This was the merciless, windblown wilderness that raised one of the
Imperium’s hardiest warrior breeds. Here were the scattered islets in the
Caducades Sea where they were left naked as pre-pubescents to survive the
ritual Month of Making. Here were the hill-forts where the Cadian Youth
armies wintered and toughened and waged mock wars on their neighbour
forts. Here were the crags, ice-lakes and axel-forests where they learned the
arts of camouflage.
Here were the wide, sundered plains where their live firing exercises
were staged.
There is a saying: ‘If the ammo ain’t live, this ain’t no Cadian practice’.
Right from the time they are issued with their own las-guns, which is about
the same time they are given their first primary readers, the young warrior-
caste of Cadia are handling live ammunition. Most can fire, and kill, and
perform most infantry field drills before they reach the age often standard.
Little wonder that the shock troops of Cadia are among the Imperium’s
best.
But we weren’t here to gawp at the rugged crucible of landscape that had
formed the Cadians.
We were here to look at the pylons.
‘CHERUBAEL’S BEEN HERE,’ said Fischig, jockeying the control stick and
eyeing the windspeed gauge. ‘Far as I know, nine times in the last forty
years.’
‘You’re sure?’
‘It’s what you pay me for. Your daemonhost – and whatever he’s working
for – is fascinated by Cadia.’
‘Why have the Inquisition not had a hint of it?’
‘Come on, Gregor. The galaxy is big. Aemos once told me that the
weight of data generated by the Imperium would fry all the metriculators
and codifiers on Terra in a flash if it was input simultaneously. It’s a matter
of making connections. Sifting the data. The Inquisition – and you – have
been looking all over for signs of Cherubael. But some things just don’t
flag. I got lucky.’
‘How?’
‘I was doing my job. Old friend of mine, Isak Actte, from the old arbites
day. Used to be my boss, in fact. He rose, got promoted, wound up on
Hydraphur as an arbites general and then got stationed here as watch
overseer to the Cadian Interior Guard. I contacted him years ago, and got a
message I had to check.’
‘You’re intriguing me.’
He ran us low over a headland and our speeder made a small, sharp
shadow on the glittering ice-lake below.
‘Actte said the arbites had closed down a heretical cell here on Cadia
about ten years ago. Called themselves the Sons of Bael. A fairly worthless
lot, by all accounts. Harmless. But under interrogation, they’d admitted to
following a daemon they called Bael or the Bael. The local inquisitor
general spent some time with them and had them all burned.’
‘What’s his name?’
‘Gorfal. But he’s dead, three years gone. The current incumbent is a she.
Inquisitor General Neve. Anyway, the cell has flared up a few times since
then. Nothing a good team of riot-officers couldn’t handle. Like I said, the
Sons of Bael were pretty harmless, really. They were only interesting in one
thing.’
‘Which was?’
‘Measuring the dimensions of the pylons.’
THE PYLON HAD been looming in our windscreen for a while now, and
Fischig swept us around it, almost kissing the black stone.
The moaning song of the wind as it laced through the geometries of the
pylon was now so loud I could hear it over the racing turbines of the
speeder.
The pylon was vast: half a kilometre high and a quarter square. The
upper facing of the smooth black stone was machined with delicate craft to
form holes and other round-edged orifices no bigger than a man’s head. It
was through these slim, two hundred and fifty metre tubes that the wind
moaned and howled.
And the tubes weren’t straight. They wove through the pylon like worm
tunnels. Tech-magos had tried running tiny servitor probes through them to
map their loops, but generally the probes didn’t come back.
As we banked up higher for another pass, I could see the distant shape of
the neighbouring pylon, across the moors, sixty kilometres away. Five
thousand, eight hundred and ten known pylons dot the surface of Cadia, not
counting the two thousand others that remain as partial ruins or buried
relics.
No two are identical in design. Each one rises to a precise half kilometre
height and is sunk a quarter kilometre into the ground. They predate
mankind’s arrival in this system, and their manner of manufacture is
unknown. They are totally inert, by any auspex measure known to our race,
but many believe their presence explains the quieting of the violent warp
torrents that makes the Cadia Gate the single, calm, navigable route to the
Ocularis Terribus.
‘They were trying to measure this thing?’
‘Uh huh,’ Fischig replied clearly over the speeder’s drive as we pulled
another hard turn. ‘This and several others. They had auspex and geo-
locators and magnetic plumbs. Finding the exact dimensions... and I do
mean exact... was the entire goal of the Sons of Bael.’
‘They connect with Cherubael... I mean, beyond the “Bael” part?’
‘The interview logs I’ve read show they name “Bael” fully as a god
called Cherub of Bael, who came amongst them and made demands that
they measure the pylons in return for great knowledge and power.’
‘And the inquisitor general... this Gorfal? He suppressed this?’
‘Not deliberately. I think he was just sloppy.’
‘I want to speak with the current inquisitor general... Neve, did you say
her name was?’
‘Yeah. I thought you might.’
WHILE DAYLIGHT REMAINED, we flew west to Kasr Derth, the largest
castellum in the region and the seat of provincial government for the
Caducades. Fischig switched on the speeder’s vox-ponder and broadcast the
day’s access codes to the sentry turrets as we passed the outer ring-ditch.
Even so, Manticore and Hydra batteries traversed and tracked us as we went
over.
The vox-ponder pinged fretfully as it detected multiple target-locks.
‘Don’t worry,’ said Fischig, noticing my look. ‘We’re safe. I think the
Cadians enjoy taking every possible opportunity to practise.’
We ran down the line of a slow moving convoy – drab, armoured twelve-
wheeler transports escorted by lurching Sentinel walkers – and followed the
highway up towards the ridge of the earthwork. Beyond it, and two more
like it, the heavy, grey fortifications and shatrovies of Kasr Derth sulked in
the twilight.
Watch-lights on skeleton towers stood on the upper slope of the
earthwork. More turret emplacements and pillboxes studded the defence
berm like knuckles. Again, the vox-ponder pinged.
Fischig dropped the speed and altitude, and swung us down towards the
eastern barbican, a small fortress in its own right, bristling with Earth-
shaker platforms. A bas-relief Imperial eagle decorated the upper face of
the ashlar-dressed structure.
We ran in through the barbican’s gate, over the hydraulic bascule that
crossed the inner moat, and into the castellum’s deliberately narrow and
twisting streets.
Cadia’s earliest kasrs had been built in the High Terra style, with the wide
streets laid out on a grid system. In early M.32, a Chaos invasion had made
wretchedly short work of three of them. The broad, ordered avenues had
proved impossible to defend or hold.
Since then, the kasrs had been planned in elaborate geometric patterns,
the streets jinking back and forth like the teeth of a key. From the air, Kasr
Derth looked like an intricate, angular puzzle. Given the Cadians’ mettle
and their skills at urban-war, a kasr could be held, street by street, metre by
metre, for months if not years.
We slunk along the busy, labyrinthine streets as the caged lamps came on
and business began to shut for the night. I was about to remark to Fischig
that it looked for all the world like a military camp, until I realised that even
the civilian fashion was for camouflaged clothing. It soon became easy to
pick out locals from visitors. The jag-white and grey of tundra dress or the
panelled green and beige of moor fatigues marked out newcomers and off
duty soldiery. The population of Kasr Derth wore grey and brown
checkered urban camouflage.
We passed the stilted horreums of the Imperial Cadian Granary, and the
tight-packed baileys of the rich and successful. Even the townhouses of the
wealthy had armouring on their mansard roofs.
To the left lay the brightly-lit aleatorium, to which night crowds were
already flocking to gamble away their pay. To the right, Kasr’s senaculum
with its gleaming, ceramite-plated shatrovy pyramid. Ahead, lay the minster
of the Inquisition. The vox-ponder pinged again as the gun-walls along the
deep approach followed us.
Fischig settled the speeder down on the spicae testicae paving of the
minster’s inner yard, where sunken guide-lights stitched out a winking
cross. Inquisitorial guards in gold-laced burgundy armour approached us as
we swung back the speeder’s canopy and climbed out.
I showed the nearest one my rosette.
He clipped his heels together and saluted.
‘My lord.’
‘I wish to see the inquisitor general.’
‘I will inform her staff,’ he said obediently, and hurried away across the
herringbone paving, holding up his baldric so his power sword wouldn’t trip
him.
‘You won’t like her,’ Fischig said as he came round the parked speeder to
join me. ‘Why?’ ‘Ah, trust me. You just won’t.’
‘IT’S LATE. I had finished business for the day,’ said Inquisitor General
Neve, stabbing her holoquill back into the brass power-well on the desk.
‘My apologies, madam.’
‘Don’t bother. I’m not about to shut my doors to the famous Inquisitor
Eisenhorn. We’re a long way from the Helican sub, but your fame precedes
you.’
‘In a good way, I hope.’
The inquisitor general rose from her writing desk and straightened the
front of her green flannel robe. She was a short, sturdy woman in her late
one tens, if my eye was any judge, with salt and pepper hair plied back
tightly into a bourse. She had the typical pale, tight flesh and violet eyes of
a Cadian.
‘Whatever,’ she snapped.
We stood in her sanctum, an octastyle chamber with a black and white
cosmati floor and aethercite walls inscribed with a waterleaf design. It was
lit with rushlights and the flame glow accented the carved lotus motif.
Inquisitor General Neve clumped around her desk to face us, leaning on
an ornate silver crutch.
‘You’ll want to be reviewing the Bael records, I suppose?’
‘How did you guess?’ I asked.
She favoured her weight on her sound foot and pointed the rubber-capped
toe of the crutch at Fischig.
‘Him, I know. He’s been here before. One of yours, I suppose, inquisitor.’
‘One of my best.’
She arched her spare, plucked eyebrows. ‘Hah. Much that says about
you. Come on. The archivum.’
A DIM SCREW-STAIR led down to the basement archivum. The turning
steps of the spiral were hard for her to manage, but she shooed me away
curtly when I offered to assist her.
‘I meant no insult, inquisitor general,’ I said.
‘Your kind never do,’ she snapped. I felt it wasn’t the moment to inquire
what kind that might be.
The archivum was a long, panelled chamber lit only by the lamps of the
double-faced desk-row that ran down its middle.
‘Light buoy!’ Neve snarled, and a servitor-skull drifted down from the
coffered ceiling, hovering at her shoulder and igniting its halogen eye-
beams.
‘Bael, Sons of. Find,’ she told it, and it coursed away, turning and
dipping, sweeping the racks of the catalogue with its twin spears of light.
It stopped, eight sections down, and began to buzz around a shelf
groaning with data-slates, file tubes and dusty paper books.
Fischig and I followed Neve as she hobbled over to join it.
‘Sons of... Sons of... Sons of Teuth, Sons of Macharius, sons of bitches.’
She glanced round at me. ‘That passes for humour here, Eisenhorn.’
‘I’m sure it does, madam.’
Her fingers went back to the stacks, running along the fraying spines and
tagged slate-sleeves, following the skull-buoy’s light beams.
‘Sons of Barabus... Sons of Balkar... Here! Here it is. Sons of Bael.’
She pulled a file case off the shelf, blew the dust off it into my face and
handed it to me. ‘Put it back where you found it when you’ve finished,’ she
said. She turned to go.
‘Your pardon, wait,’ I said.
Two emphatic thumps of her crutch swung her around to face me again.
‘What?’
‘Your predecessor... um...’
‘Gorfal,’ whispered Fischig.
‘Gorfal. He burned the members of this cult without examination. Have
you never reviewed the case?’
She smiled at me. It wasn’t encouraging.
‘You know, Eisenhorn... I always imagined roving inquisitors like you
had adventurous, exciting lives. All so very exhilarating, all that celebrity
and heroism and notoriety. To think I used to dream of being like you. You
have no idea, do you?’
‘With respect, inquisitor general... of what?’
She gestured at the file case I was clutching. ‘The crap. The nonsense.
The bric-a-brac. The Sons of Bael? Why the hell should I review that case?
It’s dead, dead and nothing. A bunch of fools who were pulled off the West-
moorland pylon in the middle of the night for playing around with geo-
locators. Whoooo! I’m so scared! Imagine that, they’re measuring us! Do
you have any idea what this wardship is like?’
‘Inquisitor general, I—’
‘Do you? This is Cadia, you silly fool! Cadia! Right on the doorway of
Chaos! Right in the heart of everything! The seepage of evil is so great, I
have a hundred active cults to subdue every month! A hundred! The place
breeds recidivists like a pond breeds scum. I sleep three or four hours a
night if I’m lucky. My vox chimes and I’m up, called out to another nest of
poison that the arbites have uncovered. Firefights in the street, Eisenhorn!
Running battles with the foot soldiers of the archenemy! I can barely keep
up with the day-to-day banishments, forget the past cases my crap-witted
predecessor filed. This is Cadia! This is the Gate of the Eye! This is where
the bloody work of the Inquisition is done! Don’t distract me with stories of
some engineering club gone bad.’
‘My apologies.’
‘Taken. See yourselves out,’ She limped away.
‘Neve?’
She turned. I dropped the file case on to the reading table.
‘They might have been idiots,’ I said, ‘but they’re the only solid link I
have to a daemonhost that could destroy us all.’
‘A daemonhost?’ she said.
‘That’s right. And the beast that controls it. A beast that, if I’m right... is
one of ours.’
She lurched back down the archivum.
‘Convince me,’ she said.
THIRTEEN
A reunion.
War-bells.
The long, slow task begins.
I DON’T KNOW if I did convince the inquisitor general. I don’t know if I
could. But she heard me out and stayed around for another two hours,
helping to locate the files of connected cases and other materials. Past nine,
she was called away to a disturbance on an island community in the
Caducades. Before she left, she offered accommodation for me and my staff
in the minster, which I politely declined, and made it clear that I had her
permission to continue my investigation in Kasr Derth, provided I kept her
informed.
‘I’ve heard stories about your... adventures, Eisenhorn. I don’t want
anything like that happening on my turf. Do we understand each other?’
‘We do.’
‘Good night, then. And good hunting.’
Fischig and I were left alone in the archivum.
‘You were wrong,’ I told him.
‘How’s that?’
‘I did like her.’
‘Hah! That hard-nosed bitch?’
‘Actually, I liked her because she was a hard-nosed bitch.’
I always took pleasure in meeting a fellow inquisitor who conducted their
work fairly and seriously, even if their methods differed from mine. Neve
was a thoroughbred puritan, and lacked patience. She was abrupt to the
point of rudeness. She was over-worked. But she called things as she saw
them, despised sloppiness, and took the threats to our society and way of
life completely seriously. In my opinion, there was no other way for an
inquisitor to behave.
WE WORKED ON until midnight, studying and collating the contents of
hundreds of case-files.
By then, the gun-cutter had arrived from the landing fields at Kasr Tyrok,
in response to my vox-summons. Fischig found one of Neve’s rubricators
and charged him with making data-slate copies of the most promising files
ready for our return in the morning. Then we got back into the speeder and
flew through the castellum’s zig-zag streets to the town field.
The stars were out, and it was cool. Noctule moths fluttered around the
landing lights of the waiting cutter.
There was a mauve smudge in the night sky, down low over the eastern
horizon. The rising nebula of the Eye of Terror. Even from this great
distance, just a blur in the heavens, it put a chill into me. If the two-headed
eagle symbolises all that is good and noble and right about the Imperium of
Mankind, that rancid blur symbolised all that was abominable about our
eternal foe.
LAUGHTER AND WARM voices greeted Fischig as we went aboard. Aemos
shook him repeatedly by the hand and Bequin planted a quick kiss on his
cheek that made him blush. He exchanged a few playful put-downs with
Nayl and Medea, and asked Husmaan if he was hungry.
‘Why?’ the scout-hunter asked, his eyes widening in anticipation.
‘Because it’s supper time,’ said Fischig. ‘Betancore, get this crate into the
air.’
We were going to that safe place he had mentioned.
I HAD NOT been aboard the sprint trader Essene for some five years. A
classic Isolde-pattern bulk clipper, the ship was like a space-going
cathedral, three kilometres long, and looked as majestic holding low anchor
above Cadia as it had when I first saw it, nearly one hundred years before,
in the cold orbit of Hubris.
Medea coasted us in towards the cargo hatch of the gigantic craft.
‘A rogue trader?’ asked Inshabel cautiously, looking over my shoulder at
the ship ahead.
‘An old friend,’ I reassured him.
SHIP MASTER TOBIAS Maxilla was, I suppose, my most unlikely ally. He’d
made his living shipping luxury goods officially, and unofficially, along the
space lanes of the Helican sub-sector. He still did. He was a merchant, he
maintained, to any that asked.
But he had a pirate’s taste for adventure, a yearning for the halcyon days
of early space-faring. I had hired his ship during the affair of the
Necroteuch, to provide nothing more than transport for my team, but he had
got involved, with increasing glee, and he’d stayed involved ever since.
Every few years over the last century, I had hired him to run passage for me
or some of my staff, or he had contacted me to ask if his services were
needed. Just because he was bored. Just because he was ‘in the
neighbourhood’.
Maxilla was an educated, erudite man with a subtle wit and a taste for the
finest things in life. He was also a charming host and a good companion and
I liked him immensely. He was in no way a formal part of my staff. But he
was, I suppose, after all this time and all those shared adventures, a vital
part.
The year before, when it had been decided that Fischig would embark on
this long chase after the Cadian leads, I had asked Maxilla to provide him
with transportation, for as long as it was needed. He had agreed at once, and
not because of the generous fee I was offering. To him, it sounded like a
true adventure. Besides, it promised a chance to give the old Essene a
proper long run out, beyond its normal route of the Helican stars.
A genuine voyage. An odyssey. That was what Tobias Maxilla lived for.
HE WAS WAITING in the cargo hold to greet us even before the extractor
vents had finished dumping out the cutter’s thruster fumes. He had dressed
for the occasion, as was his way: a blue velvet balmacaan with huge sleeves
and a jabot collar, a peascod doublet of japanagar silk, patent leather
sabattons with gold buckles, and a stupendous fantail hat perched on his
powdered periwig. His face was skin-dyed white and set with an emerald
beauty spot. His cologne was stronger than the thruster fumes.
‘My dear, dear Gregor!’ he cried, striding forward and taking my
proffered hands with both of his. ‘A signal joy to have you back aboard our
humble craft.’
‘Tobias. A pleasure, as always.’
‘And dear Alizabeth! Looking younger and more fragrant than ever!’ He
clasped her hand and kissed her cheek.
‘Steady now, you’ll smudge... your make up.’
‘Wise Aemos! Welcome, savant!’
Aemos just chuckled as his hand was shaken. I don’t think he ever knew
quite what to make of Maxilla.
‘Mr. Nayl!’
‘Maxilla.’
‘And Medea! lavishing! Quite ravishing!’
‘You certainly are,’ Medea said playfully, allowing one of her circuit-
inlaid hands to be kissed.
‘You knew we were coming, Maxilla. You might have smartened up a
bit,’ said Fischig. Amid laughter, they shook hands. I realised their
relationship had changed. They had been together for a year on this
mission. Fischig had never really connected with Maxilla: their
backgrounds and lives were too divergent. But clearly, a year in each
other’s company had brokered a true friendship at last.
That pleased me too. An inquisitor’s band works better when it is close
knit.
Maxilla turned to Husmaan and Inshabel.
‘You two I don’t know. But I will, as that’s what dinners are for.
Welcome to the Essene.’
MAXILLA’S SCULPTURAL GOLD servitors, each one a work of art, had
prepared a late supper for us in the grand dining lounge. A pate zephir of
crab, fresh from the Caducades that morning, ontol flowers poivrade in their
husks, fillets of Cadian boar hongroise, followed by an ebonfruit talmouse
with cream and Intian syrup. The gilded sommelier served petillant
Samatan rose, heavy-bodied Cadian claret, a sweet and sticky Tokay from a
lowland dos on Hydraphur, and stinging shots of Mordian schnapps.
Our humours were good, and the impromptu supper gave us time to step
back from the work at hand and relax. None of us spoke of the case, or the
demands that it was likely to make of us. To rest the mind often clears it.
I was going to need clarity now.
WE RETURNED TO Kasr Derth the next morning in the gun-cutter. The
steel dawn over the wide island group of the Caducades was cut by the
rising edge of a burning, red sun. As we swept in over the craggy mainland,
the peaks and edges of the moors were caught with a pink alpenglow.
Despite the fact that we were broadcasting the correct clearances, we
were challenged six times in the half-hour descent. At one point, a pair of
Cadian Marauders rolled in and flanked us as they checked us over.
Military security dominated the Cadian way of life. Every non-military
transport, shuttle and starship was placed under acute observation,
especially those that behaved suspiciously or wandered from the authorised
flight routes. Aemos told me that a pinnace carrying the Deacon of Arnush,
visiting Cadia for a promulgation seminar, had been shot down over the Sea
of Kansk six months earlier, simply because it failed to give the correct
codes. It made me wonder how our unknown foe had got his minions on
and off Cadia.
Unless, like us, he had an identity and a rank that easily turned aside
routine security checks.
WE WERE DIVERTED sixty kilometres west of Kasr Derth because a war
was going on. The dawn light was filled with the flashes and light streaks of
a mass rocket attack.
Eight regiments of Cadian Shock, just a few days away from shipping out
to a tour of duty on one of the inner fortress worlds of the Cadian Gate,
were staging a live firing exercise.
We finally set down on the minster’s launch pad over an hour late. The
war-bells in every tower and shatrovy in the Kasr were ringing to signal that
the roar of battle from the nearby plains and moors was just a practice.
We divided our efforts. Fischig took Aemos to the Minster’s archivum to
study the records we had ordered copied the night before and do further
research. Bequin, escorted by Husmaan, went to search the stacks of the
Ecclesiarchy’s records in the apostolaeum. Inshabel and Nayl visited the
Administratum’s catalogue of records.
I went with Medea to the Ministry of Interior Defence.
THERE ARE NO arbites on Cadia. A permanent state of martial law governs
the world, and as a result, all civil policing duties are overseen by the
Interior Guard, a sub-office of the Cadian Imperial Guard itself. In Kasr
Derth, the region’s administrative capital, their headquarters is the Ministry
of Interior Defence, a grey-stone donjon adjoining the fortress of the martial
governor, right at the heart of Kasr Derth.
Members of the Interior Guard are chosen at random. Worldwide, one in
every ten soldiers recruited into the Cadian forces is transferred into the
Interior force at the end of basic and preparatory, whatever their
achievements and promise. As a result, some of the most able troopers ever
raised on this planet of warriors serve out their time on the home world
itself, and Cadia boasts one of the most effective and skilled planetary
defence forces of any Imperial world.
We were seen by a Colonel Ibbet, a powerful, lean man in his forties who
looked like he should have been leading the charge into the Eye of Terror:
He was courteous, but mistrustful.
‘We have no files on illegal or suspect immigration.’
‘Why is that, colonel?’
‘Because it doesn’t happen. The system does not permit it.’
‘Surely there are unfortunate exceptions?’
Ibbet, his grey and white camoed uniformed starched and pressed so
sharply you could have cut yourself on the creases, steepled his fingers.
‘All right, then,’ I said, changing tack. ‘What if someone wanted to get
onto the planet anonymously? How could that be managed?’
‘It couldn’t,’ he said. He wasn’t giving at all. ‘Every identity and visit-
purpose is logged and filed and any infractions quickly dealt with.’
‘Then I’ll start with the files annotating those infractions.’
RESIGNEDLY, IBBET SHOWED us into a codifier room and assigned us a
military clerk to take us through the records. We sorted and checked for
about three hours, slowly becoming bored with the interminable lists of
orbital boardings, air-space interceptions and ground-based raids. I could
tell that a thorough review of these records alone was going to take weeks.
SO THAT’S WHAT we did. We spent ten and a half weeks scouring the
archives and catalogues of Kasr Derth, working in shifts and living out of
the quarters on the gun-cutter. Every few days, we returned to the Essene
for a little rest and reflection. It was the dead of winter by the time we were
finished.
FOURTEEN
Winter brings a chance.
The damned has a name.
The pylon at Kasr Gesh.
WINTERTIDE ON CADIA.
There had been glinting ice-floes in the gun-metal waters of the
Caducades that morning, and light snow had fallen on the moors. At that
time of year, the foul corona of the Eye of Terror was visible even during
the fleeting hours of daylight. The unholy mauve radiance of the nights
became a violet fuzz in the cold daylight, like a badly-blotted ink stain on
white paper.
It made us feel like we were under surveillance all the time. The Eye,
bloodshot, angry, peering down at us.
Worst of all were the moor winds, cold and sharp as a Cadian’s bayonet,
blowing down from arctic latitudes. The high lakes were all frozen now,
and lethal pogonip fogs haunted the bitter heaths and uplands. In the Kasr
itself, it seemed like the locals had a morbid fear of heaters or window
insulation.
Chilly gales breathed down the hallways of the minster and the
Administratum building. Water froze in the pipes.
Despite it all, the war-bells sounded every few days, and the moors rolled
with the sounds of winter manoeuvres. I began to imagine that the Cadians
were simply shooting at each other to keep warm.
Ten and a half long, increasingly cold weeks after we had begun our
systematic search of the Kasr’s records, I was making my now habitual
morning walk from the minster of the Inquisition to the headquarters of the
Interior Guard. I wore a thick fur coat against the cold, and spike-soled
boots to combat the sheet ice on the roads. I was miserable. The search had
left us all pale and edgy, too many fruitless hours spent in dark rooms.
There had been so many promising leads. Links and traces of the Sons of
Bael, unauthorised starship traffic, suspicious excise logs.
They had all dwindled away into nothing. As far as we could make out,
no living member of the Sons of Bael, or any living associate or family
member, remained. There had been no pylon-related cult activity, not even
registered xeno-archaeological work. I had interviewed specialist professors
at the universitary, and certain tech-priests from the Mechanicus who were
shown in the records as having expert knowledge of the pylons.
Nothing.
With Inshabel, Nayl or Fischig, I had travelled the region, as far afield as
Kasr Tyrok and Kasr Bellan. A worker in the gunshops of Kasr Bellan, who
had been identified as a Bael cult member, turned out to simply have the
same name, misfiled. A wasted ten hour round trip by speeder.
Aemos had constructed a codifier model by which we checked record
anomalies against the timetable of past cult activity.
There seemed to be no correlation at all.
I WALKED UP the steps of the Ministry of Interior Defence, and submitted
myself to the clearance check in the postern guardhouse. It should have
been a formality. I had been arriving at the same time almost every day for
the last seventy-five. I even recognised some of the guardsmen by sight.
But still, it was like the first time I had ever been there. Papers were not
only stamped, but read thoroughly and ran through an anti-counterfeit
auspex. My rosette was scrutinised and tagged. The duty officer voxed my
details through to the main building to get authorisation.
‘Doesn’t this ever bore you?’ I asked one of the desk officers as I waited,
folding my papers back into my leather wallet.
‘Doesn’t what bore me, sir?’ he asked.
I HADN’T SEEN Ibbet since the first week. I’d been rotated between a
number of supervisors. One told me it was because of shift changes, but I
knew it was because none of them liked to deal with an inquisitor.
Especially a persistent one.
That morning, it was Major Revil who escorted me in. Revil, a surly
young man, was new to me.
‘How can I assist you, sir?’ he asked curtly.
I sighed.
Open log books and data-slates were piled around the workstation where
I had abandoned them the night before. Revil was already calling for a clerk
to tidy them away and make space for me before I could explain that I’d
made the mess in the first place.
He looked at me warily. ‘You’ve been here before?’ I sighed again.
I HAD TWO hours. At eleven, I was due to meet Inshabel and Bequin and
fly out to a village on one of the islands in the Caducades to investigate a
rumour that a man there knew something about smuggling. Another waste
of time, I was sure.
I started in on the air-traffic day-book, reading through the lists of orbital
transfers for a summer day two years earlier. Halfway down the slate was
an entry showing a shuttle transfer from an orbiting ship to a landing field
near Kasr Gesh. Gesh was near to one of the pylons frequented by the Sons
of Bael. Moreover, on checking, I realised the date put it three days before
the last incident of cult activity at the pylon.
I stoked up the data-engine, and requested further information on the
entry. I was immediately denied. I used a higher decrypt key, and was
shown a report that withheld both the name of the ship and the source of its
authority. I began to get excited, and scrolled down. Even the purpose of the
visit was restricted.
Now I typed in the teeth of my highest decrypt key. The terminal
throbbed and chattered, sorting through files and authorisations.
The name came up. My elation peaked, and plunged away.
Neve. The mysterious entry had been a record of a classified mission by
the inquisitor general. Back to square one.
THE ISLAND WAS cold and bare. A small fishing community clung to the
rim of the western bay. Inshabel swung the speeder down onto the cobbled
tideway where spread nets had gone stiff with ice.
‘How much longer, Gregor?’ Bequin asked me, winding her scarf around
her throat.
‘How much longer what?’
‘Until we give up and leave? I’m so sick of this fate-forsaken world.’
I shrugged. ‘Another week. Until Candlemas. If we haven’t found
anything by then, I promise we’ll say goodbye to Cadia.’
THE THREE OF us trudged up the icy walk to a grim tavern overlooking the
sea wall. Anchor fish, as tall as men, were hung outside, salted and drying
in the winter air.
The barman didn’t want to know us, but his steward brought us drinks
and led us through to a back parlour. He admitted that he had sent the
message about the smuggler. The smuggler was here to meet us, he said.
We entered the back parlour. A man sat by the roaring grate, warming his
jewelled fingers at its flames. I smelled cologne.
‘Good morning, Gregor,’ said Tobias Maxilla.
Despite the shouting coming from the back parlour, the steward brought
us herb omelettes and bowls of steaming zar-fin broth, along with a bottle
of fortified wine.
‘Are you going to explain?’ asked Inshabel tersely.
‘Of course, dear Nathun, of course,’ Maxilla replied, pouring a careful
measure of wine into each glass.
‘Be patient.’
‘Now, Tobias!’ I snapped.
‘Oh,’ he said, seeing my look. He sat back. ‘I confess I have become
despondent these last few weeks. You’ve been so busy and I’ve just been
waiting up there on the Essene... well, anyway, you’ve said a number of
times that the answer you’re searching for depended on one key thing. It
depended on you establishing a way of getting past this dire planet’s
obsessively tight security. Anonymously. And I said to myself... “Tobias,
that’s what you do, even though Gregor doesn’t like to think about it.
Smuggling, Tobias, is your forte.” So I decided to see if I could smuggle
myself down here. And guess what?’
He sat back, sipping his glass, looking disgustingly pleased with himself.
‘You smuggled yourself onto the planet to prove it could be done?’ asked
Bequin slowly.
He nodded. ‘My shuttle’s hidden in the spinneys behind the village. It’s
amazing how many zipped mouths and blind eyes you can buy with a purse
of hard cash round here.’
‘I don’t know what to say,’ I said.
He made an open-handed gesture. ‘You told me weeks ago that the
Interior Guard recognised no illegal or suspect immigration. Well, I’m here
today – literally – to prove that claim wrong. Cadia’s a tough nut to crack,
I’ll admit. One of the toughest I’ve faced in a long and naughty career. But
not impossible, as you see.’
I sank my wine in a single gulp. ‘I should sever my links with you for
this, Tobias. You know that.’
‘Oh, pooh, Gregor! Because I’ve shown up the Cadian Interior Guard as
a bunch of fools?’
‘Because you’ve broken the law!’
‘Ah ah ah! No, I haven’t. Bent it, possibly, but not broken it. My
presence here is entirely legal, under both Cadian local and Imperial general
law.’
‘What?’
‘Come on, my old friend! Why do you think my shuttle wasn’t blasted
out of the heavens this morning by eager Cadian lightning jockeys? That
was a rhetorical question by the way. Answer... because when the
interceptors came scrambling up to meet me, I broadcast the right security
clearance, and that contented them.’
‘But the day codes are privileged! The counter-checks are triple! They
are issued only to those with appropriately high credentials. What authority
could you possibly have used to get them?’
‘Well, Gregor... yours, of course.’
IT HAD BEEN staring me in the face, and it took the grandstanding
flamboyance of Maxilla, in his very worst showing-off mode, to reveal it.
The reason the Interior Guard had no file on illegal or suspect immigration
was because there was nothing of that nature to file. Those that tried to run
the strict gauntlet of Cadian security and failed, died. The ones that got
through were never noticed.
Because they were using high-level security clearances, masquerading as
the sort of official visitor who would not be stopped.
People like me. People like Neve.
‘I never made this trip,’ Neve said, staring steadily at the data-slate I was
showing her. ‘Or this.’
‘Of course not. But someone borrowed your authority code. Used it to
gain trans-orbital access. That’s how they were getting in. Look here, your
code again, and again. And before that, the code headers of your
predecessor, Gonfal. It goes back forty years. Each and every flurry of
activity from the Sons of Bael... and other cults... can be matched by space-
to-surface transfers cleared as genuine Inquisition flights.’
‘Emperor protect me!’ Neve looked up. She put down the data-slate and
called hoarsely for a servitor to bring more lights into her octastyle
sanctum.
‘But my authority code is protected. How was it stolen? Eisenhorn, yours
was used to prove this. How was that stolen?’
I paused. ‘It wasn’t, not exactly. One of my associates borrowed it to
prove the point.’
‘Why doesn’t that surprise me? Oh, no matter! Eisenhorn, there’s a great
deal of difference between you and me. You may have rogue elements in
your band who act behind your back in unorthodox, unilateral ways. I do
not. My code could not have been abused so.’
‘I accept your point, but it could. Who has access to your code?’
‘No one! No one below me!’
‘But above you?’
‘What?’
‘I said this could be one of ours. A senior inquisitor, a grandmaster even.
Certainly a wily veteran with enough clout to pull the right strings.’
‘That would require a direct override at the highest levels.’
‘Exactly. Let’s look.’
IN THE END, that was my adversary’s downfall. All the blood and fury and
combat we had gone through was as nothing to this prosaic clue that
revealed his identity. To steal Neve’s authority code, and the authority codes
of her predecessors, my adversary had been forced to use the clout of his
own identity get into the files.
The record of that operation was encrypted, of course. Sitting side by
side at the codifier in her sanctum’s annex, Neve and I quickly found it. It
wasn’t even hidden. He never thought anyone would look.
But still, it was encrypted.
The cryptology was beyond both me and Neve. But together, combining
our ranks, we could request, via the Astropathicus, permission to use the
Inquisition’s most powerful decryption keys.
It took five hours to approve our joint rating.
JUST AFTER MIDNIGHT, a scribe from the Officio Astropathicus brought us
the message slate. Midwinter winds shook the sanctum’s casements.
I was alone with Neve. We had felt it inappropriate to have company.
This was a matter of the gravest import. We had talked, of this and that, to
pass the time, though both of us were restless and edgy. She poured
generous glasses of Cadian glayva, which took the edge off the cold.
Her aide announced the scribe, and he entered, bowing low, his augmetic
chassis grinding beneath his robes. He held out a slate to her clutched in the
mechadendrites that served as his hand. Neve took it and dismissed him.
I rose, and put down my barely touched glass of spirits.
Neve limped over to me, leant on her silver crutch, and held up the slate.
‘Shall we?’ she asked.
WE WENT INTO the annex and loaded the slate into the ancient codifier.
The limpid green display shifted feverishly with runes. She opened the file
we were after and set the key to work.
It took a moment or two.
Then the identity of the veteran who had used his power to manipulate
Neve’s code was revealed on the small, green-washed screen. At last, the
damned had a name.
It shocked even me.
‘Glory from above,’ breathed Inquisitor General Neve. ‘Quixos!’
AEMOS WAS ARGUING with Neve’s chief savant, Cutch.
‘Quixos is dead, long dead!’ Cutch maintained. ‘This is clearly a case of
someone using his authority.’
‘Quixos is still registered as living by the annals of the Inquisition.’
‘As an oversight! No body has ever been retrieved. No proof of death—’
‘Precisely...’
‘But still! There has been no sign or word from Quixos for over a
hundred years.’
‘None that we’ve seen,’ I said.
‘Eisenhorn’s right,’ Neve said. ‘Inquisitor Utlen was presumed dead for
over seventy years. Then he reappeared overnight to bring down the tyrants
of Esquestor II.’
‘It’s most perturbatory,’ Aemos muttered.
Quixos. Quixos the Great. Quixos the Bright. One of the most revered
inquisitors ever to roam the Imperium. His early texts had been required
reading for all of us. He was a legend. At the age of just twenty-one he had
burned the daemons out of Artum. Then he had purged the Endorian sub-
sector of its false goat-gods. He had transcribed the Book of Eibon. He had
broken the wretched sub-cult of Nurgle that had tainted one of the palaces
of Terra itself. He had tracked down and killed the Chaos Marine Baneglos.
He had silenced the Whisperers of Domactoni. He had crucified the Witch-
king of Sarpeth on the battlements above his incinerated hive.
But there had always been an odour about Quixos. A hint that he was too
close to the evil he prosecuted. He was a radical, certainly. Some amongst
the ordos said he was a rogue. Others said, in low, private voices, much
worse.
To me, he was a great man who had perhaps gone too far. I simply
honoured his memory and his achievements.
Because, as far as I had been concerned, he was long dead.
‘COULD HE STILL be alive?’ Neve asked.
‘Madam, not at all...’ Cutch began.
‘I don’t know why you employ him,’ I said, pointing dismissively at the
Cadian savant. ‘His advice isn’t sound.’
‘Well really!’ Cutch huffed.
‘Shut up and go away,’ Neve told him.
She stalked across to me and took my empty glass from me. ‘Go on, then.
Your opinion.’
‘You want it? From an adventurer like me? Are you sure, inquisitor
general?’
She thrust a topped-up glass of glayva into my hand so hard it sloshed.
‘Just give me your damned opinion!’
I sipped. Aemos was staring over at me nervously from the settle by the
door.
‘Quixos could be very much alive. He’d be... what, now, Aemos?’
‘Three hundred and forty-two, sir.’
‘Right. Well, that’s no age, is it? Not given augmetics, or rejuvanat
drugs... or sorcery.’
‘Dammit!’ Neve said.
‘He’s an incredibly gifted individual, as his career testifies. He has a
reputation, however unwarranted, for straying too far to the radical side. He
has... dabbled with the warp. We can say that much. Just because we’ve
heard nothing of him these last hundred or more years, doesn’t mean he
isn’t still active.’
‘And that activity?’ Neve smacked the tip of her crutch down twice on
the tiled floor. ‘What? What? Utilising daemonhosts? Perverting
inquisitors? Hunting for abominated texts like your Necroteuch? Triggering
the dreadful atrocity of Thracian?’
‘Perhaps? Why not?’
‘Because that would make him a monster! The exact antithesis of
everything our order is about!’
‘Well, yes it would. It’s happened before. A powerful man who gets so
close to the evil he is sworn to combat he gets dragged into it. Inquisitor
Ruberu, for example.’
‘Yes, yes! Ruberu, I know...’
‘Grandmaster Derkon?’
‘Granted. I remember...’
‘Cardinal Palfro of Mimiga? Saint Boniface, also called the Deathshead
of a Thousand Tears?’ intoned Aemos.
‘For the Emperor’s sake!’
‘High Lord Vandire?’ I suggested.
‘All right, all right—’
‘Horus?’ Aemos dared to whisper.
There was a long silence.
‘Great Quixos,’ Neve murmured, slowly turning to face me. ‘Will he be
added to that unholy list? Is one of our greatest to be condemned so?’
‘If he must be,’ I replied.
‘What do we do?’ she asked.
‘We find him. We find out if the passing centuries have truly changed
him into the being we fear he is. And if they have, Emperor pardon me, we
declare him Heretic and Extremis Diabolus, and we destroy him for his
crimes.’
NEVE SAT DOWN hard, staring into her glass. There was a knock at the
sanctum’s door, which Aemos answered.
It was Fischig.
‘Sir... madam...’ he said, acknowledging Neve.
‘Well, Fischig?’
‘Further to your discoveries today, we have been monitoring inter-orbit
traffic. Two hours ago, a craft made planetfall at Kasr Gesh. It cleared
Cadian airspace using the inquisitor general’s authority code.’
Gesh was the site of the last known cult activity.
I gathered up my coat. ‘With your permission, inquisitor general?’
Neve rose with me, her face set hard. ‘With your permission, Inquisitor
Eisenhorn. I’d like to come with you.’
KASR GESH WAS three hours flight from Kasr Derm. Cruel winter had
blown in from the upland heaths, and the gun-cutter was vibrating its way
against powerful ice storms.
My band was all aboard, preparing weapons. So was Inquisitor General
Neve and a six-man squad of Cadian Elite Shock, impassive troopers in
winter camo armour, prepping matt-white lasrifles and stubbers in the crew-
bay.
‘God-throne, they’re tough-ass bastards,’ Nayl muttered to me as I
passed him coming out of the bay.
‘Impressed?’
‘Scared is more like it. Regular Cadian is soldier enough for me. These
are elite. The elite of the elite. The Kasrkin.’
‘The what?’ It wasn’t like an experienced fighter to show deference to
other fighting men.
‘The Kasrkin. The Cadian best, and you can imagine what that means.
Holy Terra, they’re stone-killers!’
‘How do you know?’
‘Oh, please... look at their necks. The Caducades sea-eagle brand. Come
to that, just look at their necks. I’ve seen slimmer trees!’
‘Good thing they’re on our side,’ I said.
‘I bloody hope so,’ Nayl returned, and moved forward.
The deck lurched again. I walked back down the bay, steadying myself
on the overhead handloops, and approached Neve.
She was dressed in Cadian mesh armour, and was adjusting her winter
hood. I saw she had exchanged her silver crutch for a lift-assisted cane
fitted with a compact cylindrical grenade launcher.
In my fur coat and bodyglove armour, I felt underdressed.
‘Your usual attire?’ I asked.
‘Necessary clothing. You should come out with me sometime, cult-
hunting in the islands after dark.’
‘My staff are... worried. These men are Kasrkin?’
‘Yes.’
‘Their reputation precedes them.’
‘So did yours.’
‘Good point. But, anyway...’
Neve looked round at the row of Cadian elite. ‘Captain Echbar!’ she
shouted, raising her voice above the roar of the buffet and the thrusters.
‘Inquisitor general ma’am!’ said the warrior on the end.
‘Inquisitor Eisenhorn wants reassurance that you are the best of the best
and will be careful to watch the backsides of him and his band.’
Six snow-visored faces turned to look at me.
‘We’ve logged the bio-spoors of you and your company into our sighting
auspexes, sir,’ Echbar announced to me. ‘We couldn’t shoot them now even
if we wanted to.’
‘Make sure you don’t. My staff and I will be leading the way in. The
situation may not call for firepower. If it does, the vox or psyker command
is “Rosethorn”. Vox-channel is gamma-nine-eight. Are you prepared for a
psychic summons?’
‘We’re prepared for anything,’ Echbar told me.
The gun-cutter stopped shaking.
‘We’ve come out of the storm,’ Medea voxed me.
A moment later, she crackled, ‘I see approach lights. Kasr Geth landing
field in two.’
THE PYLON STOOD three kilometres outside the earthworks of Kasr Geth.
The night was clear and glassy, with a heaven full of stars. The Eye of
Terror throbbed dimly at the top of the sky. It seemed to me more lurid and
brighter than ever before.
Somewhere up there, I knew, orbital detachments of the Cadian Interior
Guard were hunting the hidden starship from which the visitors to Kasr
Gesh had come. Neve had scrambled them before we left, with strict orders
not to move until we had engaged on the ground.
We didn’t want our visitors tipped off.
My team moved in up through the frost-caked scrub of the moorland
slope. The pylon was simply a black, oblong, absence of stars. I could hear
it moaning.
I slid out my main weapon: a storm-bolter which I had sprayed green in
memory of the prize sidearm I had lost somewhere on Eechan, may
Librarian Brytnoth forgive me. This storm-gun was slightly larger and more
powerful, but nothing like so well engineered as the boltpistol I had
treasured.
On my hip I wore a Cadian hanger, a short, curved twin-edged sabre that
replaced my beloved power sword. It was just a simple piece of sharp steel,
but I’d had the hierarchs at the Ministorum of Kasr Derth make some
modifications.
Still, in truth, I felt vulnerable going up that slope.
Nayl was to my left, fielding a combat-cannon. Husmaan to my right
with his trustworthy long-las. Inshabel was to his right, armed with a brace
of antique laspistols that had belonged to Inquisitor Roban. Fischig, hefting
an old and trusted arbites-issue riot-gun, had gone wide to the far left.
Bequin, a long-barrelled autopistol in her gloved hand, was right beside
me.
Behind us, Neve and her Kasrkin lurked, waiting for my signal.
Aemos was aboard the gun-cutter with Medea, hovering above the drop
point, lights killed. They, rather than Neve and her elite, were my
reassurance.
‘WHAT DO YOU see?’ I voxed.
‘Nothing,’ replied Husmaan and Nayl.
‘I’ve got an angle into the seat of the pylon,’ said Inshabel. ‘I see lights.’
‘Confirm that,’ crackled Fischig, wide to the left. ‘There are men down
there. I count eight, no ten. Twelve. Portable lights. They’ve got machines.’
‘Machines?’
‘Handheld. Auspexes.’
‘Measuring again,’ Neve whispered over the link.
‘I’m sure,’ I said. Then I said, in Glossia: ‘Thorn eyes flesh, rapturous
beasts at hand. Aegis to arms, crucible. All points cowled. Razor torus
pathway, pattern ebony.’
MY STORM-GUN MADE a loud click as I racked it.
The robed men working in the floodlights around the foot of the pylon
froze and slowly turned from their work to look at me.
I walked down from the moor, through the ice-stiffened bracken, bracing
my gun in a pose that could kill any one of them.
Bequin followed me a few steps behind, her pistol held loosely, ready to
swing up.
I knew we were covered by Husmaan, Inshabel, Nayl and Fischig.
‘Who is the leader here?’ I asked, panning my weapon around.
‘I am,’ said one of the robed figures.
‘Step forward and identify yourself,’ I said.
‘To whom?’
I raised the rosette plainly in my left hand. ‘Imperial Inquisition,’ Some
of the robed men moaned with dismay.
The leader did not. He stepped forward. I could suddenly smell a cold,
metallic scent, one that was not new to me.
A warning that came too late.
The leader slowly drew back his cowl. His angular, cruel head was
hairless and a cold blue light shone out through his skin. Sharpened, steel-
tipped horns sprouted from his brow. His eyes were white slits.
A daemonhost!
‘Cherubael?’ I said, foolishly, stupidly.
‘Your witless ally is not here, Eisenhorn,’ said the being, baring his teeth
and gleaming with light.
‘My name is Prophaniti.’
FIFTEEN
Rosethorn.
What Cadians are born for.
The last thing I expected.
THERE WERE TWO ways for this to go. The first was for me to continue
talking, and still be talking when the daemonhost killed me and tossed my
smoking corpse on the piled bodies of my comrades. The second was for
me to say ‘Rosethorn’ and place my trust in the mettle of my supporters and
the ever-vigilant gaze of the holy God-Emperor.
I said ‘Rosethorn.’
The thing, Prophaniti, was stepping towards me. I shot at it with my
storm-gun, watching in horrid fascination as it caught the white hot bolt
rounds out of the air in its outstretched hands, like a man idly catching
slow-tossed racquet balls.
The bolts dulled to an ember-red in its palms, and it tossed them aside.
But its entire attention was on me.
Its mistake.
Husmaan’s first hot-shot round cracked into the side of its head, and
snapped its skull around. As it was reeling, its robes were ripped across by
double laspistol fire from Inshabel. Then Fischig’s riot-gun roared and
knocked it down in the brittle bracken. Fischig liked to spend his free time
hand-moulding the shot for his riot-gun’s cartridges. Every pellet was silver,
and stamped with a sacred sigil of warding that I had taught him long ago.
Prophaniti writhed in agony, the blessed buck-shot burning into its flesh.
It started to rise, wrathful and frenzied, but a grinding whir rose from my
left, a sound like a circular saw running up to speed.
Nayl’s cycling drum-cannon raked the daemonhost and the earth around
it, doing hideous damage. The blizzard of shots twisted it, ripping off one of
its legs at the knee and the fingers off its left hand.
Eldritch power, white-cold like frost, spurted from its wounds like lava,
and burned the soil.
The other cultists were moving now, pulling weapons and firing wildly
into the night. The place lit up with shooting.
Las-fire came from behind us, startlingly close, whipping past our elbows
and shoulders. Two of the cultists crumpled, one of them smashing over
some of the erected floodlights.
Echbar and his Kasrkin charged in past us to engage.
In truth, I may say now that they were somehow more terrifying than the
daemonhost. For Prophaniti was a supernatural thing, and one expected it to
be horrifying.
The Kasrkin were just men. It made their actions all the more
astonishing. Six white blurs, they fell upon the cultists, lasguns barking at
close range. They wasted no shots. One shot, one kill. A cultist fled past
me, and a Kasrkin swung to bring him down. His weapon refused to fire as
its sight-auspex detected my bio-spoor in the range-field. A second later, I
was no longer blocking the shot and the weapon spat.
The fleeing cultist tumbled over headlong in the brush.
More cultists had emerged from the other side of the pylon, and I could
hear rapid exchanges of gunfire in that direction. Nayl’s combat-cannon
was making its distinctive metallic whir between bursts of fire. Inshabel’s
las-cracks overlapped themselves.
‘Fischig!’ I yelled. ‘Lead off round the back of the pylon. See what you
can find. Maybe take a damn prisoner before the Kasrkin slay them all!’
I turned back to deal with the ruined daemonhost. We had punished it
badly, but I had no illusions as to its resilience.
Or rather... I had thought I hadn’t.
Prophaniti was already gone, the ground still smoking and congealing
where it had lain.
‘Damn! Damn!’
Neve limped down the slope to me. ‘Eisenhorn?’
‘The daemonhost! Did you see it?’
She shook her head. A loud explosion rolled from the far side of the
pylon.
‘You killed it, didn’t you?’
‘Not even slightly,’ I replied.
‘Gregor!’ Bequin shrieked.
Prophaniti was behind me, hanging in the air, incandescent with power. It
was naked, and wore the terrible wounds we had inflicted like medals. The
right leg, frayed at the knee, dribbled glowing white ichor. Entry wounds
and burns bubbled and smoked across its chest. Its head hung slack on a
neck broken by Husmaan’s hot-shot. It spread its arms and a hand that was
just a thumb and a mangled palm sprayed lightning into the midnight grass.
‘Nice... try...’ the slack head gurgled.
With its robe gone, I could see its body was strung with chains, padlocks
and bindings. Stitching needles and other iron awls were pierced into its
luminous flesh. Various amulets hung from the chains, or from the barbed
wire looped around its neck.
‘Run,’ I said to Neve and Bequin. ‘Run!’
Neve raised her silver cane and triggered the launcher.
The grenade hit Prophaniti in the lower torso and blew it back a few
metres with a flash of fyceline.
It rushed back towards us, moaning and chattering in a warp-cursed
language.
Bequin grabbed both me and Neve. Her untouchable quality was our only
defence now, and she knew it.
Prophaniti stopped short of us, just a metre or so away, hovering in the
air and shining like a star. I could smell the rank stench of eternal murder
about it.
Its broken neck made a sound like snapping twigs as it slowly turned its
lolling head to look at us. The light of dead suns billowed from its eyes and
mouth.
Bequin’s fingers bit into my arm. The three of us looked up at it, hair
ruffled by the warp-winds it generated.
‘Tenacious,’ it said. ‘No wonder Cherubael likes you. He said you
employed untouchables. A wise move. You can’t hurt me with your guns,
but with her around, I can’t touch you with my mind.’
‘Fortunately, I don’t have to,’ it added.
It lashed out suddenly with its maimed hand. Neve shrieked as she was
hurled aside. There was blood on Prophaniti’s thumb talon.
Alizebeth’s psychic deadness blocked its psychic rage. But not its
physical assault.
It lashed out again, and I leapt back, dragging Bequin.
Prophaniti cackled.
‘Alizebeth!’ I yelled, and grabbed her by the hand. ‘Stay with me!’
I drew my hanger. The short curved blade shone in Prophaniti’s glare.
The runes inscribed on the blade by the Ministorum glittered.
I swung hard, skillessly and frantic, the blade of the hunting sword biting
into its rib-meat. It howled and flew back, smoke issuing from the gash.
I circled, hanger in my right hand, Bequin clinging to my left.
‘You’ve done your homework. Pentagrammatic runes on your blade. A
nice touch. They hurt!’
It lunged at me.
‘But nothing like the hurt you will feel!’
Alizebeth screamed. She fell, and I struggled to hold on to her hand. If
our contact broke, I would feel the full force of the daemonhost’s power.
I blocked with my falcate blade, shredding the flesh off the left part of its
chest, exposing the ribs.
Its talons ripped into my left shoulder and down my flank, ripping my
body-armour into tatters.
Blood cascaded down inside my clothes.
I swung again, trying for an uin ulsar. It gripped my blade fast, in its one
good hand. Smoke rose from the clamping fist around the blade.
It clenched its teeth in pain. ‘The wards... hurt... but they are no...
stronger... than the weapon... you should learn to... make your weapons
sounder... next time...’
‘Not that there will be... a next time....’ it added. The hanger had become
so hot, I let it go with a howl. Prophaniti tossed the buckled, molten steel
aside. It had burned its hand terribly, but it didn’t seem to notice.
‘Now comes death,’ it said, reaching for me.
THE NEXT FEW seconds are burned in my memory. I will never see such
heroism again, I am sure. Captain Echbar and two of his Kasrkin troopers
assaulted Prophaniti from the rear. Their lasguns wouldn’t fire because
Bequin and I were in their range-field.
Echbar body-tackled the daemonhost, smashing it away from us.
Prophaniti hurled him aside, and then incinerated the second Kasrkin mid-
leap with its eyes. The third jammed his Cadian bayonet up to the hilt in
Prophaniti’s breastbone. Fire exploded back from the wound, down the
trooper’s arm and engulfed him.
He fell back screaming as Echbar came in again, a ragged hole in his
cheek and throat. His knife, clenched double-handed, split Prophaniti open
down the back bone. The warp-energies that boiled out blew Echbar apart.
Screaming, Prophaniti writhed away through the air.
I knew it wasn’t dead. I knew it couldn’t really die.
But the Cadian elite had given me an opening by sacrificing their lives.
They had fallen in the service of the God-Emperor, which is what every
Cadian is born to do.
‘Aegis! By scarlet inferno! Thorn redux!’
I screamed the words into my vox, clinging on to Bequin’s hand.
Prophaniti came hurtling towards us.
Lights blazing, the gun-cutter surged in overhead in a killing run. The
downdraft blasted the icy bracken flat and threw us over. Medea was low,
so low...
The gun-servitors trained wing and chin turrets on the charging
daemonhost.
When they opened up, their firepower was so monumental, they
vaporised it.
The light went out.
I pulled Bequin to me as the drizzle of liquidised host-form rained on us
out of the cold night.
I could hear Fischig calling my name.
‘Help her,’ I said to Fischig as I rose, and he scooped Bequin up.
I looked around. The place was littered with dead, most of them cultists.
Inshabel had found Neve, lacerated but alive, twenty metres up the slope,
and was calling for a medic.
The aft thrusters of the gun-cutter winked hot-white in the night sky as
Medea banked around out of her run to come down again.
Nayl, who had taken a flesh wound to the arm, leaned against the pylon
and shut off his whirring cannon-drum.
‘We... we need to regroup,’ I said.
‘Agreed,’ said Fischig.
‘You have no idea what you’re up against, do you?’ asked Husmaan.
We all turned. The old skin-hunter from Windhover was stalking down
the moor slope towards us, his long-las slung over one crooked arm. Fierce
graupel had begun to fleck down from the clouding sky.
‘Do you?’ he hissed again. I felt Bequin tense.
It wasn’t Husmaan.
Husmaan looked at me. White light shone from his eyes. His voice was
Prophaniti’s.
‘Not the slightest clue,’ he said. ‘You can destroy my physical host, but
you cannot break the links to the master.’
‘Husmaan!’ Inshabel cried.
‘Not here any more. He was the most open mind, so I took him. He will
serve for a while.’
I took a step forward. Husmaan raised a hand. ‘Don’t bother, Eisenhorn,’
said Prophaniti. ‘I could kill you all here, now... but what’s about to happen
is far more interesting.’
Husmaan, his arms held out from his body and his head back, suddenly
rose into the air, dropping his prized long-las. Steadily, he floated away into
the sky until he had vanished over the moors into the dawn’s counter glow.
‘What did he mean?’ asked Bequin.
‘I don’t—’
Floodlights mobbed over the rise and we suddenly heard the clank of
armoured tracks.
Twenty Cadian APCs crested the brow, their floods beaming down at us.
Cadian shock troops scrambled down the slope, covering us with their guns.
‘What the hell?’ Nayl cried.
I was stunned. This was the last thing I had expected.
‘Inquisitor Eisenhorn,’ boomed a vox-amped voice from the lead APC.
‘For crimes against the Imperium, for the atrocity at Thracian, for
consorting with daemonhosts, you are hereby arrested and condemned to
death.’
I recognised the voice.
It was Osma.
SIXTEEN
The Hammer of Witches.
Three months in the Carnificina.
Plight from Cadia.
FLANKED BY SIX robed interrogators reading aloud from the Books of
Pain and the Chapters of Punishment, Inquisitor Leonid Osma came down
the moorland slope towards me. Pink dawn light was beginning to spear
lengthways across the bleak heath, and the gorse and bracken was stirred by
the early morning breeze. Distantly, heath grouse and ptarcerns were
whooping and calling to the midwinter sun.
Osma was a well-built, broad-shouldered man in his one fifties. He wore
brass power armour that glowed almost orange in the ruddy dawn. Ornate
Malleus crests decorated his armour’s besagews and poleyns and six purity
seals were threaded around his bevor like a floral wreath. A long cloak of
white fur played out behind him, brushing the tops of the heather and gorse.
His face was blunt and pugnacious. His eyes were glinting dots set in
puffy lids, fringed by heavy, grey eyebrows. His bowl-cut hair was the
colour of sword-metal. Some years before, he had lost his lower jaw during
a fight with a Khornate berserker. The augmetic replacement was a jutting
chin of chrome, linked into his skull by feed tubes and micro-servos. The
emblem of the Inquisition rose above his head on a standard mounted
between his shoulder blades. In one hand he carried a power hammer, the
mark of his ordo.
In the other, a sealed ebony scroll tube. I recognised it at once. A carta
extremis.
‘This is insanity!’ Fischig growled. The Cadians around us stiffened and
jabbed with their weapons.
‘Enough!’ I warned Fischig. I turned to my companions. They looked so
lost, so miserable, so dismayed.
‘We will not fight our own,’ I told them. ‘Surrender your weapons. I will
soon have this laughable error resolved.’
Bequin and Inshabel handed their weapons to the Cadian guards. Fischig
reluctantly allowed the storm troopers to divorce him from his riot-gun.
Nayl unclipped his drum-cannon’s ammo feed, slid out the magazine box
and passed that to the waiting troops, leaving the disabled heavy weapon
strapped around his torso on its harness.
I nodded, satisfied. ‘Thorn bids Aegis, by cool water, soft,’ I whispered
into my vox and then turned to meet Osma.
He raised his power hammer in a brief gesture and the mumbling
interrogators fell silent and closed their books. ‘Gregor Eisenhorn,’ he said
in precisely enunciated High Formal Gothic, ‘In fealty to the God-Emperor,
our undying lord, and by the grace of the Golden Throne, in the name of the
Ordo Malleus and the Inquisition, I call thee diabolus, and in the testimony
of thy crimes, I submit this carta. May Imperial justice account in all
balance. The Emperor protects.’
I slid my storm-gun out of its holster, ejected the clip and handed it to
him grip first.
‘I hear full well thy charge and thy words, and make my submission,’ I
responded in the ancient form. ‘May Imperial justice account in all balance.
The Emperor protects.’
‘Dost thou accept this carta from my hand?’
‘I accept it into mine, for that I may prove it thrice false.’
‘Dost thou state thy innocence now, at the going off?’
‘I state it true and clear. May it be so writ down.’
Vox-drones idling by the shoulders of the interrogators had been
recording all this, but the youngest interrogator was transcribing it all with a
holoquill into a dispositional slate suspended before him on a grav plate. I
noted this detail with some satisfaction.
Preposterous though the charges were, Osma was prosecuting with total
and precise formality.
‘I ask of thee thy badge of office,’ Osma said.
‘I deny thy asking. By the code of prejudice, I declare my right to retain
my rank until due process is concluded.’
He nodded. His language changed from High Formal to Low Gothic. ‘I
expected as much. Thank you for avoiding unpleasantness.’
‘I don’t think I’ve avoided any unpleasantness, Osma. What I have
avoided is bloodshed. This is ridiculous.’
‘They all say that,’ he muttered snidely, turning away.
‘No,’ I said levelly, stopping him dead. ‘The guilty and the polluted fight.
They deny. They straggle. In my lifetime, I have brought down nine marked
diabolus. None went quietly. Mark that fact in your record,’ I said to the
scribing interrogator. ‘If I was guilty, I would not be submitting to your
process so politely.’
‘Mark it so!’ Osma told his hesitating scribe.
He looked back at me. ‘Read the carta, Eisenhorn. You’re guilty as sin.
This show of understanding and co-operation is exactly what I would have
expected from a being as canny and clever as you.’
‘A compliment, Osma?’
He spat into the bracken. ‘You were one of the best, Eisenhorn. Lord
Rorken actually pleaded for you. I acknowledge your past triumphs. But
you have been turned. You are Malleus. You are an abomination. And you
will pay.’
‘This is insane...’ Neve muttered, limping towards us.
‘And none of your business, inquisitor general,’ Osma replied.
Neve faced him, her torn armour wet with her own blood.
‘This is my province, inquisitor. Eisenhorn has proved himself to me.
This charade is interfering with Inquisition business.’
‘Read the carta, inquisitor general,’ Osma told her. ‘And shut up.
Eisenhorn is clever and convincing. He has fooled you, lady. Be thankful
that you’re not implicated.’
MY COMPANIONS WERE arraigned at Kasr Derth, under Neve’s
recognizance. No such luxury for me. I was flown south aboard a Cadian
military lighter, through the dawn, to the furthest islet of the Caducades
group, to the infamous Cadian prison, the Carnificina.
They had fettered my hands and feet. I sat on a bracket-bench dropped
from the wall of the lighter’s armoured hold, surrounded by Cadian guards,
and read the carta by the shifting light that sheared in through the window
slits.
I could scarcely believe what I was reading.
‘Well?’ grunted Fischig from his seat in the corner. I had been allowed
one spokesman, and I had selected Fischig, with his legal background.
‘Read it,’ I said, holding the carta out to him.
One of the impassive Cadians took it from me and passed it to the
scowling Hubrusian.
After a few moments spent reviewing the scroll, Fischig blurted out an
incredulous profanity.
‘Just what I thought,’ I said.
THE CARNIFICINA JUTTED up from the thrashing sea like the molar of a
massive herbivore, the gum eaten away.
It had not been built so much as hollowed out of the upthrust crag. There
wasn’t a wall on the prison isle thinner than five metres.
Vicious plungers broke in white spray around its granite base and the
western aspects were open to the worst of the pelagic abuse from the oceans
beyond. Icebergs from the calving glaciers at Cadu Sound and the distant
Caducades Isthmus jostled and splintered in the open water between the
prison isle and the barren atolls opposing it.
Kelp and hardy, lean axel trees decorated its lower slopes.
The lighter swung in over the eastern ramparts and settled on a pad cut
from the stone. I was marched under guard out into the cold sunlight, and
then into the dank hallways of the rock. The white-washed walls sweated
and stank of seawater. Rusting chains ran down from the ceiling to the
hatches of forgotten oubliettes.
I could hear the shouts and screams of prisoners. The demented and
infected of the Cadians lived here, mostly ex-servicemen who had been
driven mad in the wars of the Eye.
The Cadian troops handed me over to a squad of red-uniformed prison
guards who reeked of unwashed flesh and carried pain-flails and leather
whips.
They opened up a fifty centimetre-thick hatch cover riven with studs, and
pushed me into a cell.
It was four paces by four, cut from stone, with no window. It stank of
piss. The previous incumbent had died here... and never been removed.
I pushed aside his dry bones and sat on the wooden bunk. I knew
nothing. I had no idea if the Cadian Interior had captured that rogue
starship, or if anyone had managed to track the flight of the thing that had
been poor Husmaan.
The path to Quixos, the path we had been so lucky to strike at last, was
disappearing by the second as we played these games. And there was
nothing I could do about it.
‘WHEN DID YOU first decide to consort with daemons?’ asked Interrogator
Riggre.
‘I have never done so, or decided to do so.’
‘But the daemonhost Cherubael knows you by name,’ said Interrogator
Palfir.
‘Is that a question?’
‘It—’ Palfir stammered.
‘What is your relationship with the daemonhost Cherubael?’ cut in
Interrogator Moyag sternly.
‘I have no relationship with any daemonhost,’ I replied.
I was chained to a wooden chair in the great hall of the Carnificina,
winter sunlight shafting down from the high windows. Osma’s three
interrogators stalked around me like caged beasts, their robes swirling in the
draft.
‘It knows your name,’ Moyag said testily.
‘I know yours, Moyag. Does that give me power over you?’
‘How did you orchestrate the atrocity at Thracian Hive Primaris?’ asked
Palfir.
‘I didn’t. Next question.’
‘Do you know who did?’ asked Riggre.
‘Not precisely. But I believe it was the being you have referred to.
Cherubael.’
‘He has been in your life before.’
‘I have thwarted him before. One hundred years ago, at 56-Izar. You must
have the records.’
Riggre glanced at his colleagues before replying. ‘We do. But you have
been searching for him ever since.’
‘Yes. As a matter of duty. Cherubael is a repellent abomination. Do you
wonder that I would seek him out?’
‘Not all your contacts with him have been recorded.’
‘What?’
‘We know some contacts have remained secret,’ Moyag rephrased.
‘How?’
‘The sworn testimony of an Alain von Baigg. He states that you sent an
operative code-named Hound out to make contact with Cherubael, one year
ago, and that you refrained from telling your ordo master about it.’
‘I didn’t think to bother Lord Rorken with the matter.’
‘So, you don’t deny it?’
‘Deny what? Hunting for Chaos? No, I don’t.’
‘In secret?’
‘What inquisitor doesn’t work in secret?’
‘Who is Hound?’ asked Palfir.
I had no wish to make Fischig’s life more difficult just then. I said, ‘I
don’t know his real name. He works clandestinely.’
I thought they would press me, but instead Moyag said, ‘Why did you
survive the Thracian horror?’
‘I was lucky.’
Palfir walked a circle around me, his polished boots squeaking on the
worn floor. ‘Let me make it clear. We are just beginning here. In respect to
your rank and career, we are employing interrogation of the First Action.
The First Action is—’
I cut him short. ‘I have been an inquisitor for many years, Palfir. I know
what the First Action is. Verbal interview without duress.’
‘Then you know of the Third and Fifth Actions?’ sneered Riggre.
‘Light physical torture and psychic interrogation. And by the way, you
just utilised the Second Action – verbal threat of and/or description of
Actions that may follow.’
‘Have you ever been tortured, Eisenhorn?’ asked Moyag.
‘Yes, by less squeamish men than you. And I have interrogated too.
Second Action methods really won’t work on me.’
‘Inquisitor Osma has authorised us to use any methods up to and
including Ninth Action,’ spat Palfir.
‘Again, a threat. Second Action. It won’t work on me. I told you that. I
am trying to be co-operative.’
‘Who is Hound?’ asked Riggre. Ah, there it was, the follow-up, designed
to wrong-foot by coming out of sequence. For a moment, I began to admire
their interrogation skills.
‘I don’t know his real name. He works clandestinely.’
‘Is it not Godwyn Fischig? The man you chose as your second here. The
man who waits outside this chamber?’
There are times when the injuries Gorgone Locke did to my face on
Gudrun have their benefits. My face simply couldn’t show the reaction they
were hoping to see. But inside, I balked. Their intelligence was good, good
enough to have cracked Glossia, if only partially. I was sure of the source.
They had already mentioned that weasel von Baigg. Months before, on
Thracian right before the atrocity, I had begun to suspect von Baigg. At that
time, I merely assumed he was Lord Rorken’s plant to watch over me. Now
I realised he was happy to talk to anyone. I had recognised von Baigg’s
weakness and stalled his career. Clearly he had decided to seek
advancement from other inquisitors by selling me out.
‘If you are telling me Fischig is the operative I know as Hound, I am
truly surprised,’ I replied levelly, choosing my words with extreme care.
‘We will talk to him in time,’ said Palfir.
‘Not while he is my recognised second. That would break the code of
prejudice. If you wish to interview him, I must be allowed a new second. Of
my choosing.’
‘We will get to that,’ said Riggre.
“Why did you survive the Thracian horror?’ asked Moyag.
‘I was lucky.’
‘Explain lucky?’
‘I had stopped to honour the tomb of the admiral. The Spatian Gate
protected me from the air strikes.’ After the lies Cherubael had told me on
Eechan, I dreaded this question coming up again under psychic interview.
The lies, or at least my attempts to screen them, would be picked up.
‘The atrocity was simply cover to allow you to liberate and remove from
Thracian the heretic psyker Esarhaddon.’
‘I would normally address that notion with scorn. If the entire event had
been staged simply to “launder” the psyker, then it was inhumanly wasteful.
However, I believe in some regards you are right. That’s what the atrocity
was engineered to do. But not by me.’
Moyag licked his yellowing teeth eagerly. ‘You maintain that it was in
fact Interrogator Lyko who executed the event?’
‘In collaboration with the daemonhost.’
‘But Lyko cannot answer those charges, can he? Because you killed him
on Eechan.’
‘I executed Lyko on Eechan as a traitor-enemy of the Imperium.’
‘I submit to you that you killed him because he was on to you. You killed
him to silence him.’
‘Do I really have to be here? You’re doing a fine job of making up your
own answers.’
‘Where is Esarhaddon?’
‘Wherever Cherubael took him.’
‘And where is that?’ asked Palfir.
I shrugged. ‘To his master. Quixos.’
All three of them laughed. ‘Quixos is dead. He died long ago!’ Moyag
chuckled.
‘Then why did the inquisitor general and I find that he had been
manipulating her codes to gain access to Cadian airspace?’
‘Because that’s how you made it look. You say Quixos used his power to
steal her authority code. If that’s true, then it’s a crime any deviant
inquisitor of renown could manage. You could manage it. And using a dead
man’s code means no one is going to object.’
‘Quixos isn’t dead,’ I cleared my throat. ‘Quixos is Hereticus and
Extremis Diabolus. He has perverted inquisitors such as Lyko and Molitor
into his service. He uses daemonhosts. He triggers holocausts to cover his
theft of alpha-plus class psykers.’
The three interrogators fell silent for a moment.
‘We are wasting time here,’ I said. ‘I am not the man you want.’
BUT THE TIME-WASTING continued. A week, passed, then a second. Every
day, I was taken to the great hall and subjected to anything from two to six
hours of First Action interview. The questions were repeated so many times,
I became sick of hearing them. None of the interrogators seemed to listen to
my statements. As far as I knew, no part of my story was being checked out.
They were clearly wary of escalating to physical or psychic means of
extraction. Because I was a psyker, I could at least make things difficult
enough so that they’d never know how much of what they were getting out
of me was true. Osma had evidently decided to wear me down with endless
cycles of verbal cross-examination.
For fifteen minutes each evening, with the ocean light fading, I was
allowed to speak with Fischig. These conversations were pointless. The cell
areas were undoubtedly laced with vox-thieves and listening devices, and as
far as we knew, Glossia was compromised.
Fischig could tell me little, although I was able to learn that Medea,
Aemos and the gun-cutter were not in Osma’s hands, and neither was the
Essene.
There had been no further sighting of Prophaniti-Husmaan, and Fischig
was certain that the mystery starship that had delivered Prophaniti to Cadia
had not been intercepted that fateful night.
Through Fischig’s agency, I sent petitions to Osma, to Rorken and to
Neve, protesting my arrest and urging them to take further action regarding
Quixos. No word came back.
Candlemas was long past. Three more weeks went by. I realised that the
year had turned. Outside the thick, bleak walls of the Carnificina, it was
340.M41.
AT THE END of my third month of detention and interrogation, I was led
into the great hall for my daily interview and found Osma waiting for me
instead of the usual interrogators.
‘Sit,’ he said, gesturing to the chair in the centre of the stark room.
It was dark and cold. Bitter, late winter storms were pushing in from the
east, and though it was day, no light came from the high windows. They
were muffled with snow. My breath steamed in the air, and I shivered.
Osma had arranged six lamps around the edges of the room.
I sat down, pushing my hands into the pockets of my coat against the
chill. I didn’t want Osma to see my distress. He stood, warm and insulated
in his burnished power armour, reviewing a data-slate.
I could see myself, reflected in the polished panels of his backplate. My
clothes were ragged and filthy. My skin pale. I had dropped a good seven
kilos, and now sported a thick beard as unruly as my hair. The only item in
my possession was the inquisitorial rosette in my coat pocket. It comforted
me.
Osma turned to face me. ‘In three months, your story has not changed.’
‘That should tell you something.’
‘It tells me you have great reserves of strength and a careful mind.’
‘Or that I’m not lying.’
He put the slate down on one of the lamp tables.
‘Let me explain to you what is going to happen. Lord Rorken has
persuaded Grandmaster Orsini to have you extradited to Thracian Primaris.
There you will stand trial for the charges in the carta extremis before a
Magistery Tribunal of the Ordo Malleus and the Officio of Internal
Prosecution. Rorken isn’t happy, but it is all Orsini would allow. Rorken, I
have heard, feels that your innocence – or guilt – can be ascertained once
and for all in a formal trial.’
‘The result of that trial may embarrass you and your master, Lord
Bezier.’
He laughed. ‘In truth, I would welcome such embarrassment if it meant
the exoneration of a valuable inquisitor like you, Eisenhorn. But I don’t
think it will. You will burn on Thracian for this, Eisenhorn, as surely as you
would have done here.’
‘I’ll take my chances, Osma.’
He nodded. ‘So will I. The Black Ships will arrive in three days time to
conduct you to Thracian Primaris. That gives me three days to break you
before the matter is taken out of my hands.’
‘Be careful, Osma.’
‘I’m always careful. Tomorrow, my staff will begin Ninth Action
examination of you. There will be no respite until the Black Ships arrive or
you tell me what I want to hear.’
‘Two days of Ninth Action methods will probably guarantee I won’t be
alive when the Black Ships come.’
‘Probably. A shame, and questions will be asked. But this is a lonely
prison and I am in charge. That is why, today, I’m just talking to you. Just
you and me. A last chance. Tell me the whole truth now, Eisenhorn, man to
man. Make this easy on us both. Confess your crimes before the pain begins
tomorrow, spare us the trial on Thracian, and I’ll do everything in my power
to ensure your execution is quick and painless.’
‘I’ll gladly tell you the truth.’ His eyes brightened.
‘It’s all there, on that slate you were reading. Exactly as I have been
saying these last three months.’
WHEN THE GUARDS took me back to my frigid cell, down stone hallways
where the ocean gales moaned, Fischig was waiting for me. Our daily
fifteen minutes.
He had brought a lamp, and a tray with my night meal: thin, tepid fish-
broth and stale hunks of rusk bread with a glass of watered rum.
I sat down on the crude bunk.
‘I’m to be extradited for trial,’ I told him.
He nodded. ‘But I understand tomorrow the painwork begins. I’ve filed a
protest, but I’m sure it’ll be accidentally lost in the trash.’
‘I’m sure it will.’
‘You should eat,’ he said.
‘I’m not hungry.’
‘Just eat. You’ll need your strength and from the look of you, you’ve
precious little of that.’
I shook my head.
‘Gregor,’ he said, dropping his voice. ‘I have a question to ask you. You
won’t like it much, but it’s important.’
‘Important?’
‘To me. And to your friends.’
‘Ask it.’
‘Do you remember – God-Emperor, but it seems so long ago! – last year,
when we met up again, at that grave field outside Kasr Tyrok?’
‘Of course.’
‘In the shrine tower, you said to me that you couldn’t conceive of doing
anything that would please or benefit a daemon. You said, “I can’t ever
imagine myself that insane.”’
‘I remember it clearly. You said that if you ever thought I was, you’d
shoot me yourself.’
He nodded, with a sour chuckle. There was a moment of silence, broken
only by the crackling of the lamp and the boom of the sea outside the prison
ramparts.
‘You want to be sure, don’t you, Godwyn?’ I asked.
He looked at me, reproachfully.
‘I can understand that. I expect total loyalty from you and all my staff.
You have the right to be assured of the same from me.’
‘Then you know my question.’
I fixed him with my eyes. ‘You want to ask if I’m lying. If there’s any
truth to the charges. If you have been working for a man who consorts with
daemons.’
‘It’s a stupid question, I know. If you are those things, you won’t hesitate
to lie again now.’
‘I’m too tired for anything but the truth, Godwyn. I swear, by the Golden
Throne, I am not what Osma says I am. I am a true servant of the Emperor
and the Inquisition. Find me an eagle and I’ll swear on that too. I don’t
know what else I can do to convince you.’
He got to his feet. ‘That’s enough for me. I just wanted to be sure. Your
word has always been enough, and after all the years we’ve been together, I
was sure that you’d tell me if... even if it was...’
‘Know this, old friend. I would. Even if I was the scum Osma believes
me to be, and even if I could hide it from him... I couldn’t lie to a direct
question from you. Not you, Chastener Fischig.’
The guard rapped on the cell door.
‘One minute more!’ Fischig shouted. ‘Eat your supper,’ he said to me.
‘Did Osma put you up to this?’ I asked.
‘Hell, no!’ he snarled, offended.
‘It’s all right. I didn’t think so.’
The guard hammered again.
‘All right, damn your eyes!’ Fischig growled.
‘I’ll see you tomorrow,’ I said.
‘Yeah,’ he replied. ‘Do one thing for me.’
‘Name it.’
‘Eat your supper.’
THE CRAMPS BEGAN just after what I guessed was midnight. They woke
me from a bad sleep. Pain surged through my body and my mind was numb.
I hadn’t felt this bad since Pye’s handiwork on Lethe Eleven, during the
Darknight almost two whole years before.
I tried to rise, and fell off the bunk. Spasms wracked me, and I cried out.
I vomited up the dregs of the dire supper. Bouts of fever-heat and death-
chill twitched through me.
I don’t know how long it took for me to crawl to the cell door, or how
long I lay there beating my fists against it until it opened. Hours, possibly.
Consciousness ebbed and flowed with the cramping and the rising agony.
‘Holy Emperor!’ the guard exclaimed as he opened the door and saw me
by the light of his rush-lamp.
He called out and feet came beating down the cell way.
‘He’s sick,’ I heard the guard say.
‘Leave him till morning,’ said another.
‘He’ll be dead,’ the first guard answered nervously.
‘Please...’ I stammered, reaching out my hand. It was frozen in a claw-
shape, paralysed and ugly.
Others were arriving. I heard Fischig’s voice.
‘He needs a doctor. Trained medicae help,’ Fischig said.
‘It’s not allowed,’ complained a guard.
‘Look at him, man! He’s dying! An attack of some sort.’
‘Let me through,’ said another voice.
It was the prison medic, accompanied by Interrogator Riggre, who
looked as if he had been roused from his bed.
‘He’s faking it, leave him!’ Riggre said contemptuously.
‘Shut up!’ Fischig snarled. ‘Look at him! That’s no act!’
‘He’s a master of deception,’ Riggre returned. ‘Maybe he’s been licking
the lead-paint off the door to aid his act, more fool him. This is a sham.
Leave him.’
‘He’s dying,’ said Fischig.
‘He looks bloody sick,’ said a guard uncomfortably.
More cramping spasms twisted me involuntarily.
The doctor was hunched over me. I could hear the beeping of the
medicae auspex he’d taken from his pharmacopoeia.
‘This is no act,’ he muttered. ‘His body’s in seizure. You can’t fake
muscle binding like that. Blood-oxygen is down to thirty per cent and his
heart is defibrillating. He’ll be dead in less than an hour.’
‘Give him a shot. Fix him!’ Riggre yelled.
‘I can’t, sir. Not here. We haven’t got the facilities. Ahh! Emperor, look!
He’s bleeding out now, from the eyes and nose.’
‘Do something!’ Riggre screamed.
‘We have to get him to an infirmary. Kasr Derth is the nearest. We have
to get him there quickly or he’s dead!’
‘That’s ridiculous, doctor!’ said Riggre. ‘You must be able to do
something...’
‘Not here.’
‘Call up a flight, Riggre,’ Fischig said.
‘He’s a primary level prisoner of the Inquisition! We can’t just take him
out of here!’
‘Then get Osma—’
‘He’s gone back to the mainland for the night.’
Fischig’s voice was low. ‘Are you going to be the one to tell Osma you
let his prize captive die on the floor of his cell?’
‘N-no...’
‘I’ll tell him, then. I’ll tell Osma that his man Riggre cheated him of the
greatest prosecution of his career because he couldn’t be bothered to
authorise transport and thus let Eisenhorn die of toxic shock in this prison
stack!’
‘Call up transport!’ Riggre shouted at the guards. ‘Now!’
THEY CARRIED ME up to the stone-cut landing pad on a stretcher. Voices
yelled and argued in the biting wind and blizzard-filled darkness. The medic
had fixed up an intravenous drip and was trying to slow my symptoms with
a few drugs from his kit.
The pad lights flickered on, cold and white, and backlit the swirling snow
into black dots.
A Cadian shuttle came in low, its attitude thrusters shaking the pad and
swirling the snowfall in random directions.
They carried me into the green-lit interior, and the worst of the cold and
weather was stolen away as the hatch shut. I felt the sudden yaw of the ship
as we lifted up and turned away towards the mainland. Fischig loomed over
me, adjusting the restraining straps that held me into the shuttle’s cot. Over
the roar of the engines, I could hear Riggre shouting at the pilot.
Covertly, Fischig slid an injector vial from his coat and fixed it into the
intravenous rig in place of the prison doctor’s injector.
I began to feel better almost at once.
‘Stay still, and breathe slowly,’ Fischig whispered. ‘And hold on tight.
Things are about to get... bumpy.’
‘Contact! Three kilometres and coming in hard!’ I heard the co-pilot
blurt.
‘What the hell is that?’ Riggre demanded.
There was a pinging sound from the shuttle’s transponder.
‘Throne of Earth! They’ve got a target-lock on us!’ exclaimed the pilot.
‘Attention, shuttle,’ a voice crackled over the open vox. ‘Set down on the
islet west five-two by three-six. Now, or I will shoot you out of the air!’
My vision was settling now. I looked across the green-lit cabin and saw
Riggre pull a laspistol.
‘What treachery is this?’ he asked, looking at Fischig.
‘I think you should do as you were asked and set down right now,’ said
Fischig calmly.
Riggre made to fire the pistol, but there was a searing flash of light.
Fischig burned Riggre with a blast from the digi-weapon built into the
jokaero-made ring on his right index finger. An item of Maxilla’s jewellery,
I realised.
Fischig fired another shot that vaporised the vox-system.
‘Down!’ he ordered the pilot, pointing the ring at him.
THE SHUTTLE MADE emergency groundfall in a snowstorm on the rocky
beach of the uninhabited islet.
‘Hands on your heads!’ Fischig ordered the crewmen as he bundled me
out of the hatch and into the blizzard.
I could barely walk and he had to support me.
‘You poisoned me,’ I gasped.
‘I had to make it convincing. Aemos prepared a dose that would
reactivate the binary poison in your body. Pye’s poison.’
‘You bastards!’
‘Hah! A man who can curse is far from dead. Come on!’
He half-carried me across the shingle into the oceanic gale, snowflakes
stinging our faces. Lights swooped down ahead of us as the gun-cutter came
in, executing a perfect, Betancore-style landing on the icy shingle.
Fischig bundled me up the landing ramp into the arms of Bequin and
Inshabel.
‘Dear lord, have you thought this through?’ I wheezed.
‘Of course we have!’ Bequin snapped. ‘Nathun! Get a booster shot of
antivenin!’
FOR THE SECOND time in under two years, I was dead. From binary poison
at the hands of Beldame Sadia’s henchmen on Lethe, and now, dead in a
shuttle-crash, brought down in a winter-storm over the Caducades on Cadia.
The gun-cutter lofted from the beach, ran the length of it, and then came
back towards the downed shuttle.
May the Emperor forgive me and my staff for the deaths of Riggre and
the two flight crew. Their deaths were the only way I could maintain my
security.
‘Fire,’ I heard Nayl tell Medea.
The gun-cutter’s ordnance strafed the Cadian shuttle and blew it apart.
By dawn, the jetsam along the remote islet’s shore would suggest nothing
but a tragic crash caused by the hellish storms.
WE BANKED UP through the cover of the storms towards orbital space.
Though no one told me, I knew our flight plan was covered by someone
else’s authority code.
Neve’s was my guess. Probably with her permission.
The Essene was waiting for us.
‘Now what?’ I asked Fischig hoarsely.
‘Dammit, I’ve risked everything I count dear to get you this far,’ he
replied. ‘I was kind of hoping you’d know what to do now.’
‘Cinchare,’ I said. ‘Tell Maxilla to get us to Cinchare.’
THERE ARE SOME secrets that are worth keeping.
‘What’s at Cinchare?’ Bequin asked.
‘An old friend,’ I said.
‘Not a friend, exactly,’ added Aemos.
‘No. Aemos is right. An old associate.’
‘Two old associates, to be specific,’ Aemos added.
Bequin pulled a particularly angry face. ‘You pair and your old
intimacies. Why don’t you ever give a straight answer?’
‘Because the less you know, the less the Inquisition can harm you if
we’re caught,’ I said.
‘THE NEW LEAN you,’ syruped Maxilla as I walked onto the Essene’s
bridge.
I had shaved away my beard, had my ragged hair clipped back, and
dressed in a suit of black linen after my shower. I was still terribly weak on
my feet and in no mind for Maxilla’s foolery.
‘Course is set for Cinchare,’ Maxilla said stiffly, apparently recognising
my mood. His gold-masked servitors chimed in agreement. His hooded
navigator, all senses fixed on some different, quite other place, said nothing.
‘I have a question,’ said Inshabel. He was seated at secondary navigation
position, reviewing the star-maps. ‘Why Cinchare? A mining world out in
the edges of the Segmentum, almost a Halo Star. I thought we’d be trying to
find Quixos.’
‘There’s no point.’
‘What?’ Maxilla and Inshabel asked, almost in unison.
I sat down on a padded leather seat. ‘Why make the endeavour to find
Quixos when he would surely kill us at a stroke? We’ve barely survived
individual encounters with two of his daemonhosts. We haven’t the strength
to fight him.’
‘So?’ asked Inshabel.
‘So the first thing we do is find the strength. Prepare. Arm ourselves.
Make ourselves ready to take down one of the most powerful evils in the
Imperium.’
‘And for that we need to go to Cinchare?’ Inshabel whispered.
‘Cinchare’s the start, Nathun,’ I said. ‘Trust me.’
SEVENTEEN
Rogue star.
Doctor Savine, Cora and Mr Horn.
In the annex.
EVEN AT FULL warp, it took the Essene thirty weeks to reach Cinchare.
True, we took a circuitous route, avoiding all possible encounters with
the forces of the Imperium. I hated that. For once, I hated the subterfuge.
We learned, indirectly, a few weeks into the voyage, that my escape from
Cadia had been discovered. The Inquisition – and other agencies – were
hunting me. I had been formally declared Heretic and Extremis Diabolus.
Lord Rorken had finally counter-signed Osma’s carta.
I was now something I had never been before.
A fugitive. A renegade. And in aiding me, my band of comrades had
made themselves fugitives too.
We had a few scrapes. Refuelling at Mallid, we were discovered and
pursued by an unidentified warship which we lost in the empyrean. At
Avignor, a squadron of Ecclesiarchy battle-boats, standing picket watch
along the border of the diocese, tried to run us to ground. We only escaped
that one thanks to a combination of Maxilla’s shipcraft and Medea’s
fighting nous.
On Trexia Beta, Nayl and Fischig ran across a band of arbites hunters
while they were trying to hire an astropath. They never told me how many
they had been forced to kill, but it sat badly with them for weeks.
On Anemae Gulfward, Bequin succeeded in obtaining the services of an
astropath, a sickly female called Tasaera Ungish. When Ungish found out
who I was, she begged to be returned to her backwater world. It took a long
time to convince her that she was in no danger from me. I had to open my
mind to her in the end.
At Oet’s Star, we were discovered by an Inquisitor Frontalle during a
resupply layover. As it was with Riggre and the Cadian pilots, I will always
be haunted by those necessary deaths. I tried to reason with Frontalle. I tried
very hard. A young man, he believed that taking me down was the key to a
famous career. Eisenhorn the Heretic, he kept calling me. They were the last
words on his lips when I pitched him into the geothermal heating
exchanger.
From Trexia Beta onwards, there was an almost permanent rumour that a
kill-team of the Ordo Malleus’s Grey Knights was hunting us. And the Ordo
Xenos’s Deathwatch Chapter too.
I prayed to my God-Emperor that I could complete this task before the
forces of righteousness overtook me. And I prayed to him that my friends
might be spared.
BETWEEN THOSE ESCAPADES, there were only the long, slow weeks of
transit in the deep warp. I filled my time with study, and with weapons
practice with Nayl, Fischig or Medea. I battled to get myself healthy again.
The Carnificina had wasted me, both in body and spirit. The weight I had
lost would simply not go back on, despite Maxilla’s generous banquets.
And I felt slow. Slow with a blade, slow on my feet. Slow and clumsy
with a gun.
Even my mind was slow. I began to fear that Osma had broken me.
TASAERA UNGISH WAS a semi-paralysed woman in her fifties. The arduous
rituals of the warp had left her broken and all but burned out, consigned to a
life as a junior telepath in the class-chambers of Anemae Gulfward. Her
raddled body was supported by an augmetic exo-skeleton. I believe she
might have been beautiful once, but her face was now hollow and her hair
thin where the implant plugs of her calling had been sited.
‘That time again, heretic?’ she asked as I walked into her quarters. This
was about the twentieth week of the voyage.
‘I wish you wouldn’t call me that,’ I said.
‘Coping strategy,’ she purred. ‘Your woman Bequin connived me out of a
safe life on Anemae Gulfward, and made me party to a heretic’s private
crusade.’
‘A safe life, Ungish? A bad end. You’d have been dead in another six
months, the strain of the traffic they were making you process.’
She tutted, her augmetic chassis whirring as she poured us two glasses of
amasec. Hers was laced with fitobarrier enhancers, and her room stank of
lho-leaf. I knew the rigours of her life had left her in constant pain, and she
fought that pain off with everything she could lay her hands on.
‘Dead and buried on Anemae Gulfward in six... or dead in agony in your
service.’
‘It’s not like that,’ I said, nodding as I took the glass she proffered.
‘Is it not?’
‘No. I’ve let you see my mind. You know the purity of my cause.’
She frowned. ‘Maybe,’ She was having difficulty manipulating her own
glass. The mechadendrites that governed her right hand were old and slow.
She waved me off when I tried to help.
‘Maybe?’ I asked.
She took a big swig of her drink and then poked a lho-stick between her
crinkled lips.
‘I’ve seen your mind, heretic. You’re not as clean as you like to think you
are.’
I sat down on the chaise. ‘Am I not?’
She lit the lho-stick and exhaled a deep lungful of its narcotic smoke with
a sigh.
‘Ah, don’t mind me. A ruined worn-out psyker who talks too much.’
‘I’m interested. What do you see?’
Her exo-skeleton made soft whines as it walked her over to the other
couch and the hydraulics hissed as they settled her into the seat. She took
another deep puff.
‘I’m sorry,’ she said. ‘Would you like one?’
I shook my head.
‘I have served the Astropathicus all my life, such as it is, on guild tenure
and as a freelance, as now. When your woman came to me with a job offer
and real money, I took it. But, oh me, oh my...’
‘Astropaths are supposed to be neutral,’ I countered.
‘Astropaths are supposed to serve the Emperor, heretic,’ she said.
‘What have you seen in my mind?’ I asked, bluntly.
‘Too, too much,’ she responded, blowing a magnificent smoke-ring.
‘Tell me.’
She shook her head, or that’s what I supposed the hissing action of her
head-cage was supposed to convey.
‘I suppose I should be grateful. You took me from a dead life to this... an
adventure.’
‘I don’t need you to be grateful,’ I said.
‘Dead and buried on Anemae Gulfward in six... or dead in agony in your
service,’ she repeated.
‘It won’t be like that.’
She blew another smoke ring. ‘Oh, it will. I’ve seen it. Clear as day.’
‘You have?’
‘Many times. I’m going to die because of you, heretic.’
UNGISH WAS STUBBORN and defeatist. I knew she had seen things she
wouldn’t talk about. Eventually, I stopped asking. We met every few days,
and she psychometrically captured images from my mind. The Cadian
pylons. Cherubael. Prophaniti, and the ornaments he wore.
By the time we reached Cinchare, I had a sheaf of psychometric pictures
and, thanks to the crippled astropath, a grim sense of the future.
CINCHARE. A MINERAL rock orbiting a rogue star.
Plagued by gravitic storms, the Cinchare system wanders sloppily
through the fringes of the Halo Stars at the edge of Imperial space. Ten
thousand years ago it had been a neighbour of 3458 Dornal, and had nine
planets and an asteroid belt. When we finally found it, it was lurching
through the Pymbyle systems, major and minor, and had suffered two
serious cosmological collisions. Now it had six planets and radiating sheets
of asteroid belts. Cinchare’s rogue star was locked in a drunken dance with
Pymbyle Minor, a flirtatious encounter of gravities that would take another
million years to resolve.
Cinchare itself, or more properly Cinchare rogue system/planet four
X181B, was a blue nugget of rock swaggering along an almost figure-eight
far orbit around the clashing stars, following the vagaries of their impacting
gravity wells.
Rich in ultra-rare metals including ancylitum and phorydnum, it had been
a miner’s plunder-haven for as long as it had been identified.
‘No watch ships. Precious little in the way of guidance buoys,’ Maxilla
said as he steered the Essene in-system. ‘I’ve got a habitation hot-spot. The
mining colony, I’ll bet.’
‘Park us in orbit,’ I told him. ‘Medea, fire up the cutter for landfall.
Aemos, you’re with me.’
‘WHOO!’ WHISPERED MEDEA, tightening the grip of her circuit-inlaid
hands around the bio-sensors of the cutter’s steering yoke. Another hard
buffet had shaken the craft.
‘The gravity-tides are all over the place. I keep hitting eddies and anti-
trojan points.’
‘Small wonder,’ Aemos muttered, easing himself into a deck-seat and
connecting the restraint harness across his lap. ‘The rogue star and its
planet-herd have made a disaster area of this system.’
‘Hmmm...’ said Medea, showing no concern as she rolled the cutter up
and over on its back to avoid a jagged black asteroid that tumbled across
our path. The close approach to Cinchare was a debris field, full of rock
matter and collision slag, all swirling around in complex and exotic orbits.
Parts of this field had formed into thin ring systems around Cinchare, but
even the rings were buckled and warped by gravity-clashes. The space
around us was a bright misty gold where starlight was catching the banks of
dust and micro-litter. The cutter’s shields could handle most of the larger
rocks that swirled through it, but some were giants and required evasive
manoeuvres.
Through the gold dust-light, we began to see Cinchare more clearly: an
irregular, glittered blue object, spinning fast along a stricken axis. It was
half in shadow, and the peaks of its mineral mountains made pre-dawn
flashes as they caught the early light coming up over the daylight
terminator.
‘The closer we get to the body, the worse the gravitic disturbances will
become, of course,’ Aemos mused aloud. Medea didn’t need the advice.
Even I knew that an irregular body – and especially an irregular body
composed of varying densities – would have a near-space lousy with
abnormal gravity effects. I think Aemos was just chatting to keep his mind
off things.
Medea banked us around the searing trails of three bolides, and into what
felt like a chute of high gravity. Cinchare’s surface, a revolving, pitted cold
expanse, rushed up to meet us and filled the main ports. The descent and
proximity alarms started to sound, and Medea killed them both with an
impatient sideways stab of her hand. We levelled out a little.
‘The mining facility beacons just woke up,’ Medea cleared her throat.
‘I’ve got a pre-lock telemetry handshake. They’re requesting ident.’
‘Give it.’
Medea activated the cutter’s transponder and broadcast our craft’s
identifying pulse. It was one of the disguise templates we stored in the
codifier for covert work, a delicate piece of fakery designed by Medea and
Maxilla. According to its signature, we were a research team from the
Royal Scholam Geologicus on Mendalin.
‘They’ve cleared us to touch,’ Medea reported, easing us past another
buffet of gravity turbulence. ‘They’ve activated the guide pathway.’
‘Any vox contact?’
She shook her head. ‘It could all be mechanical.’
‘Take us in.’
CINCHARE MINEHEAD WAS a cluster of old industrial structures plugging
the cone of an upthrust impact event. Flight approach was down a rille in
the crater edge. The buildings seemed at first sight to be rude and
unfinished, rough-hewn from the blue rock, but I quickly realised they were
standard Imperial modular structures caked with accretions of blue dust and
gypnate. As far as records showed, Cinchare Minehead had been here for
nine hundred years.
We set down on a cleared hardpan surrounded by serially winking marker
lamps. The braking jets kicked up a swirling halo of eluviam into the air-
less sky. After a short wait, two monotask servitors, heavy-grade units on
caterpillar tracks, emerged into the hard starlight from the shadows of a
docking barn, attached clamps to our front end and silently towed us back
into the barn.
It was a grim place of dirty bare metal and lifting gear. Two battered
prospector pods sat in berthing bays, and in the gloom at the far end was a
cargo shuttle that had seen better days.
The barn doors closed behind us, and flashing hazard lamps in the
berthing dock moved from amber to green as the atmosphere was cycled
back in. Apart from the servitors, there was no sign of life.
‘Cutter’s systems show green on outside conditions,’ said Medea,
swinging out of her seat.
‘Are we ready?’ I asked.
‘Sure,’ said Medea. She had switched her regular Glavian pilot’s gear,
with its distinctive cerise jacket, for a much more anonymous set of grubby
flight overalls. Heavy, tan and baggy, they were actually the quilted liner of
an armoured void-suit. The surface was covered in eyelets, laces and stud-
connectors where the armour segments would lock on and there were
umbilical sockets in the chest. Medea had removed the helmet ring and
allowed the heavy collar to hang open. She wore workgloves and steel-
capped military boots, and tucked her hair up under a billed cap with the
Imperial eagle on the front.
Aemos had adjusted the hydraulic settings of his augmetic exo-skeleton
to hold him in the stiffest, most upright stance possible. With a long tunic-
cloak of black bagheera, a white skull cap and an engraved data-cane, he
looked every centimetre a distinguished scholam academic.
I lacked any trace of my usual inquisitorial garb. I wore learner breeches
and high, buckled boots, an old flak-armour jerkin with dirty ceramite over-
plates, and a full-face filter mask with tinted eyeslits that resembled nothing
so much as a snarling skull. Nayl had lent me a motion tracker unit from his
personal kit, which I had strapped over my right shoulder, and a heavy,
snub-nosed laspistol that hung in an armpit rig under my jerkin. A combat
shotgun rested in a scabbard between my shoulder blades, and I had a belt
of shells for it around my waist. I looked and felt like hired thug-muscle...
which was precisely the point.
Medea popped the hatch and we descended into the barn.
It was cold, and the air was parched from too many automatic
scrubbings. Odd mechanical noises sounded sporadically in the distance.
Squat, short-base servitors were busy tinkering with the old shuttle’s
exposed engine-guts.
We clanged up the grille stairs to the interior hatch. It was marked with a
bas-relief symbol of the Adeptus Mechanicus, and an enamelled sign below
it announced that the tech-priesthood was the supreme authority at Cinchare
Minehead.
The heavy hatch whirred back into its wall-slot revealing a gloomy prep-
tunnel lined with empty void-suits that swung on their hooks in the breeze.
Beyond that, there was a dank scrub-room, a darkened office with a padlock
on the door, and an empty survey suite with a deactivated chart table.
‘Where is everybody?’ Medea asked.
WE FOLLOWED THE echoing hallways through the complex. Grubby
mining equipment was scattered or piled in corners. A small first-aid station
had been stripped of surgical equipment and stacked with crates of pickled
fish. A side room was empty except for hundreds of broken wine bottles. A
disused walk-in freezer store exuded the stink of spoiled meat through its
open door. Water spattered from the dark, lofty ceilings of some vaults.
Chains swung from overhead hoists. Cold, dry breezes gusted down the
halls.
When the wall-speakers boomed, we all started.
‘Allied Imperial Minerals! Duty rotation in fifteen minutes!’
The voice was an automatic recording. Nothing stirred in response.
‘This is most perturbatory,’ murmured Aemos. ‘According to Imperial
records, Cinchare Minehead is an active concern. Allied Imperial has a
workforce of nineteen hundred running their deep-cast mines, and Ortog
Promethium another seven hundred at their gypnate quarries. Not to
mention independent prospectors, ancillary service workers, security and
the personnel of the Adeptus. Minehead is meant to have a population of
nearly three thousand.’
We had reached a main concourse, a wide thoroughfare lit by overhead
lamps, many of which were smashed. Abandoned merchant shops and bars
lined either side.
‘Let’s look around,’ I said. We fanned out. I walked to the north end of
the trash-littered concourse and found steps leading down into a wide plaza
full of more empty shops and businesses.
I heard the whine of an electric motor from down to the left, and
followed it. Round the corner of a boarded-up canteen, a fat-tyred open
buggy was pulled up outside the unkempt entrance of a claims registry. I
went inside. The floor was covered in spilled, yellowing papers and dented
data-slates. A snowdrift of used and mouldering ration cartons filled a side
door into a filing room.
Nayl’s motion detector clicked and whirred. It projected its display on the
inside of my mask’s right lens. Motion, the rear office, eight metres.
I edged to the door and peered in, my hand on the grip of the holstered
las.
A long-limbed man in filthy overalls was crouching with his back to me,
rummaging through a foot locker.
‘Hello?’ I said.
He jumped out of his skin, turning and rising in the same frantic motion,
then crashed backwards against a row of metal cabinets. His long, gawky
face was pale with fear. His hands were raised.
‘Oh crap! Oh dear God-Emperor! Oh, please... please...’
‘Calm down,’ I said.
‘Who are you? Oh, crap, don’t hurt me!’
‘I’m not going to. My name is Horn. Who are you?’
‘Bandelbi... Fyn Bandelbi... mining superintendant second class, Ortog
Promethium... crap, don’t hurt me!’
‘I’m not going to,’ I repeated firmly. At least the frayed nametag on his
dungarees agreed with him: ‘BANDELBI, F. SUPER 2nd O.P.’
‘Put your hands down,’ I said. ‘Why did you think I was going to hurt
you?’
He lowered his hands and shrugged. ‘I didn’t... sort of... I don’t know...’
He regained a little composure and squinted at me. ‘Where did you come
from?’ he asked. He was an ugly, lantern-jawed fellow with unkempt greasy
hair and stubble. There was the hint of a raw pink birthmark on the side of
his throat.
‘Off rock. Just got here. I was wondering why there was no one around.’
‘Everyone’s gone.’
‘Gone?’
‘Gone. Shipped out. Left. Because of the Gravs.’
‘The Gravs?’
I don’t know if he was going to answer. My motion tracker suddenly
flashed an alert up on my lens and I wheeled around to find a man standing
in the registry’s entrance. He was a big man with dark skin and a white
stubble of hair and beard. The autopistol in his right hand was aimed at my
face.
‘Nice and slow,’ he said. ‘Lose the guns. And the mask.’
‘What’s going on? Who’s in charge here?’ demanded a voice from
outside. It was Aemos.
The man with the gun glanced outside and then waved me ahead of him.
Aemos, looking very haughty and dignified, stood in the streetway behind
the parked buggy.
‘Well? I am Doctor Savine, from the Royal Scholam Geologicus on
Mendalin. Is this the way Cinchare Minehead greets its guests?’ I was
impressed. There was a querulous tone of piqued authority. Aemos had
acting talents I had never imagined.
‘You got papers?’ asked the man with the gun, still covering me.
Bandelbi had emerged and was watching the exchange.
‘Of course!’ Aemos snapped. ‘And I’ll show them to someone in
authority.’
The man with the gun reached his free hand down into the neck of his
mesh-reinforced coat and pulled out a polished silver badge on a neck
chain. ‘Enforcer Kaleil, Cinchare Minehead Security Service. I’m the only
authority you’ll find round here.’
Aemos tutted and rapped the tip of his data-cane down on the rockcrete
ground. The cane-head clicked around and cast a small hologram into the
air above it: identity details, the seal of the Royal Scholam Geographicus,
and a slowly revolving 3-D scan of Aemos’s head.
‘Okay, doctor,’ nodded Kaleil. He gestured to me with the gun. ‘What
about this goon?’
‘You think I’d travel out to this misbegotten rock without a bodyguard?
This goon is Mr Horn.’
‘This goon was putting the squeeze on my friend Bandelbi.’
Aemos looked at me sternly. ‘I’ve warned you about that, Horn! Dammit!
You’re not in the Mordian gang-wars now!’
Aemos turned back to Kaleil. ‘He is somewhat enthusiastic. One
testosterone-stimm too many, somewhere along the line. But I needed
muscle, not brains, and he was cheaper than a cyber-mastiff.’
Be thankful you can’t see my face behind this mask, old friend, I thought.
‘Okay. But keep him on a leash,’ said Kaleil, bolstering his weapon.
‘Let’s go to the security station and you can tell me what the hell you’re
doing here.’
‘And you can tell me where the hell everyone is,’ replied Aemos. Kaleil
nodded and gestured for us to lead the way down the street.
‘So you don’t need me to detonate anyone’s skull, Doctor Savine?’ said a
voice.
Kaleil and Bandelbi froze. Medea slunk from cover in a shutterway
across the street, a Glavian needle pistol held in an unwavering two-handed
grip and aimed at Kaleil’s head.
‘Crap!’ Bandelbi gasped.
‘My pilot,’ Aemos said, deadpan. He flapped a hand sidelong at Medea.
‘No, Cora. We’re all friends here now.’
Medea grinned and winked at Kaleil, sliding her weapon away inside her
flight suit.
‘Had you cold, Enforcer Kaleil.’
Kaleil gave her a murderous glare and led us towards the security station.
THE STATION WAS on the second floor of a round building on the corner of
the deserted plaza. A guard-rail ran at hip-height around the office, and
beyond that, inwardly-raked windows permitted a wide view down into the
plaza area. Kaleil thumbed a wall-control that reduced the tinting in the
glass and made the room a little brighter.
Seats were arranged around a central, circular workstation, above which
glowed a holo-display. Empty ration pouches and ale bottles cluttered the
surfaces of the workstation, and handwritten notes and memos had been
taped along the edges of the console. Around the room were couch seats
with splitting upholstery, and piles of junk. A door in the rear led through to
an armoury and a ready room. The air was humid and smelled of sweat and
unwashed clothes.
Kaleil took off his mesh jacket and tossed it onto a couch. He wore a
grubby vest that showed off his physique and the Imperial Guard tattoos on
his upper arms.
His badge of office hung down over his chest like an athlete’s medal.
‘Get ’em refreshment,’ he told Bandelbi. The miner began swishing each
of the ale bottles standing on the cowling of the workstation to find one
with some contents left.
‘Fresh ones,’ Kaleil scolded. ‘And I’m sure the doctor would prefer
something softer... or harder.’
‘Amasec, if you have it,’ said Aemos.
‘Ale’s fine,’ smiled Medea, flopping onto a couch and folding her legs up
under her.
I shook my head. ‘Nothing.’
Bandelbi disappeared.
Kaleil sat down backwards on one of the workstation chairs so he could
fold his arms on the top of the backrest.
‘Okay, doctor. What’s the story?’
‘I am the head of the metallurgy department at the Royal Scholam. Do
you know Mendalin?’
Kaleil shook his head. ‘Never been there.’
‘A fine world, a noble world. Famed for its academia.’ Aemos carefully
took a seat next to Medea.
I stood back, by the windows. I could tell Kaleil had one eye on me.
‘We are engaged in a twenty year program, commissioned by Archduke
Frederik himself, to investigate the inner transition qualities of the rarest
metals for... well, the applications are classified, actually. The results may
improve the industrial health of Mendalin’s engine yards. The archduke is a
keen amateur metallurgist. He’s the patron of the Royal Scholam, in fact.’
‘Do tell,’ murmured Kaleil.
‘Phorydnum is one of the metals to be covered in our program. And this
planetoid is one of the nearest sources of it. The Administratum has kindly
issued me with a bond to visit Cinchare and obtain samples, and I have
letters from the Lord Director of Imperial Allied to inspect the phorydnum
workings. Do you wish to see them?’
Kaleil waved a dismissive hand.
‘I also hoped to meet with the tech-priests stationed here in order to
discuss their understanding of the properties of this precious substance.’
‘You’re on a fact-finding trip?’
‘A research mission,’ said Aemos.
Bandelbi returned with three ales and an enamel cup. He carried them on
a dented locker door which he was using as a tray.
‘It’s not good stuff,’ he told Aemos, handing him the cup. ‘Just ration
issue grade.’
Aemos sipped it without the hint of a shudder. ‘Rough, but bracing,’ he
announced.
Kaleil took his bottle and tugged a swig from the neck.
‘You’ve had a wasted journey, I’m afraid,’ he said. ‘Emperor knows what
Imperial Allied were playing at when they gave you those letters. They
must know their people have pulled out.’
‘Explain,’ I said. Kaleil shot me a glance.
‘This rock’s been worked pretty consistently for the last nine centuries.
It’s hazardous work, but the rewards are great. As you said, Cinchare’s a
rich source of many metals that are very hard to come by.’
He took another swig.
‘These last twenty years, the authorities here have been getting worried
about the conditions. The gravity distortions. Cinchare moving ever closer
into the grav fields of Pymbyle. Reckoning was that the place would be
unviable in another eighty, ninety years. Imperial Allied and Ortog stepped
up their work, trying to strip out as much as they could before Cinchare
passed into a gravity envelope that would make it untouchable for the next
few thousand years. The indie prospectors too... they came flocking.
Regular old fashioned ore-rush, the past few years.’
‘So what happened?’ asked Medea.
‘The Gravs,’ said Bandelbi. He was clearing a seat for himself on one of
the paper-stacked couches. He looked up and saw Medea’s quizzically
raised eyebrow.
‘Gravity sickness,’ he said at once in response to her unasked question.
He scratched the birthmark on his neck nervously. He’d been keeping a
keen eye on her. She was probably the first woman he’d seen in a while.
Kaleil was more composed.
‘Gravity sickness,’ Bandelbi continued, ‘weight distemper, lead-head, the
Gravs... you know.’
‘Chronic Gravitisthesia, also known as Mazbur’s Syndrome. A
progressive disorder caused by exotic gravitational flux. Symptoms include
paranoia, loss of co-ordination, bursts of anxiety or rapture, memory loss,
hallucination and sometimes, in extremis, homicidal urges. The condition is
usually accompanied by myasthenia gravis, osteochondritis, osteoporosis,
scoliosis and leukaemia,’ Aemos finished.
Kaleil widened his eyes. ‘I thought you were a doctor of metals, doctor,
not a medicae.’
‘I am. But gravity, that invisible power, is a fundamental part of the life
of all elements. So I take an interest in it.’
‘Yeah, well... the predictions said Cinchare might become unviable due
to gravity in ninety years. But the human body is softer than a hunk of
mineral ore. The Gravs first showed up about two years back. Workers
getting sick. A few cases of violence and insanity. Then we realised what
was going on. Imperial Allied pulled out nine months ago. Ortog seven.’
‘It’s ironic,’ Aemos said. ‘Cinchare is mineral rich precisely because of
the exotic gravities it has been subjected to in its billion year life. Elements
have been transmuted and rearranged here in ways that may be unique.
Cinchare is a precious philosopher’s stone, my friends, an alchemist’s
dream! And now mankind cannot benefit from its gifts for precisely the
same reason they exist in the first place!’
‘Yeah, doc, ironic is what it is,’ said Bandelbi, knocking back his ale.
‘That doesn’t explain why you’re still here,’ I said.
‘Skeleton crew,’ said Kaleil in a tone that said it was none of my
business. ‘The Adeptus Mechanicus pulled out too, about three months ago.
But one of theirs stayed behind. Some sort of vital research that had to be
finished. And we were ordered to stay behind and keep Cinchare Minehead
open until he finished.’
I moved round and looked out of the station windows. The plaza was
empty of everything except trash. ‘And how many is “we”, Enforcer?’
‘Service crew of twenty. I’m in charge. All volunteers.’
‘The techlords promised us triple pay!’ Bandelbi told Medea, clearly
trying to impress her.
‘Gee whiz,’ she smiled.
‘Where are the others? The other eighteen?’ I pressed.
Kaleil got up off his chair and tossed his empty bottle at an overflowing
litter basket in the corner. It bounced off and broke on the floor. ‘Around
about. This is a big place. What you see is just the tip. Like a... what’s it
called, those frozen lumps of water they have in the sea on some planets?’
‘Iceberg?’ Medea suggested.
‘Yeah, like one of those. Ninety per cent of Cinchare Minehead is
subsoil. That’s a crap of a lot of space to patrol, maintain and keep ticking
over.’
‘You’re in vox contact with the rest of the skeleton crew?’
‘We keep in touch. Some I don’t see for weeks.’
‘This tech-priest, the one who remained?’ Aemos said. ‘Where is he?’
Kaleil shrugged. ‘Gone rockside. Into the karsts and the mines. I’ve not
seen him for two months.’
‘When do you expect him back?’ Aemos said, as if it didn’t matter.
Kaleil shrugged again. ‘Never.’
‘What was his name?’ I asked, turning to look directly into the enforcer’s
dark eyes.
‘Bure,’ he said. ‘Why?’
‘Well, this is all most perturbatory!’ Aemos blurted, rising from his seat.
‘The archduke will be very put out. It has cost a deal of time and money to
venture this mission. Mr Kaleil... since we’ve come this far, I’d like to do
what little I can.’
‘Like what, doctor?’
‘Obtain some samples, inspect the phorydnum workings, study the
mineralogy ledgers?’
‘I don’t know... Cinchare Minehead’s meant to be closed up now.
Officially.’
‘Would it really be too much to ask? I’m sure the Lord Director of
Imperial Allied would be pleased if you co-operated with me. Pleased
enough to proffer a bonus if I made a report to him.’
Kaleil frowned. ‘Uh huh. What are we talking about?’
‘A day to overview the ledgers and the mineralogy database, perhaps
another day to examine the sample archives from the quarries. And... well,
how long would it take to arrange a visit to the phorydnum face? The latest
one?’
‘I call my staff in, maybe two days round trip.’
‘So... excellent! Four days total and we’ll be gone.’
‘I dunno...’ said Bandelbi.
‘Don’t you want me hanging around for a few days?’ asked Medea,
reading Bandelbi’s body language as acutely as any trained inquisitor, and
revealing as much latent acting ability as Aemos.
‘I shouldn’t allow it,’ said Kaleil. ‘This place is off limits now. Company
orders. You didn’t ought to stay here.’
‘You stay here,’ I pointed out.
‘I get danger money,’ he said.
‘And you could get more,’ said Aemos. ‘I promise you, I’ll speak highly
of your co-operation to the Lord Director of Imperial Allied... and my old
friends at the Adeptus. They would reward well anyone assisting a servant
of the archduke.’
‘Get me an ale,’ Kaleil told Bandelbi. He looked at us, rolling his chin.
‘I’ll talk to my staff, see what they think.’
‘Good, good,’ said Aemos. ‘I do hope we can reach an arrangement. In
the meantime, we’ll need quarters. Are there spare beds here?’
‘Cinchare’s been fulla empty beds since the workforce moved out,’
Bandelbi told Medea through a nasty smile.
‘Find them a hab,’ Kaleil told the miner. I’ll get on to the crew.’
‘SOMETHING’S NOT RIGHT,’ I said, pulling off my mask and tossing it onto
the floor.
‘These cots are really rather cosy,’ Aemos replied, adjusting the tension
of his exo-frame and reclining on the mattress.
We were in a dry, stuffy rec-room above the miners’ welfare. The
artificial lamplight from the plaza outside slanted in through sagging blinds.
Bandelbi had provided three metal cots with subsiding mattresses and
sleeping bags that smelled like they had been used to sieve motor fuel and
cabbage.
‘You always worry,’ Medea said, uninhibitedly shrugging off her flight
suit and kicking it into a corner. She was clad in nothing but her vest and
briefs, and her shoulder holster, which she was now unclasping.
Aemos rolled over and looked the other way.
‘It’s my job to worry. And stop getting undressed. We’re not finished.’
Medea looked at me, and rebuckled her gun rig with a dark frown.
‘Okay, my lord and master... what? What’s not right?’
‘I can’t quite put my finger on it...’ I began.
Medea tutted and flopped down on her cot.
‘Yes, you can, Gregor,’ Aemos said.
‘Maybe I can.’
‘Try.’
‘This stuff about the Gravs. Even if the corporations were suckered, it’s
not like the Adeptus Mechanicus to fail in a prediction. Any cosmologist
would know if Cinchare was entering a gravitation wilderness that would be
harmful to humans. They’d know it years in advance. Emperor protect me,
stellar objects move far slower and more predictably than human minds!’
‘A good point,’ said Aemos.
‘And one that you’d already thought of, I’m sure,’ I said.
‘Yes,’ he confirmed. ‘Kaleil is clearly lying about something.’
‘And you don’t think anything’s wrong?’
‘Of course I do,’ Aemos muttered. ‘But I’m tired.’
‘Get up,’ I told him brusquely.
He sat up.
‘At least we know Bure’s still here,’ I said.
‘This is the guy we came to find?’ Medea asked.
I nodded. ‘Magos Bure.’
‘So how do you two know him? A tech-priest magos?’
‘Old story, my dear,’ said Aemos.
‘I’ve got time.’
‘He was a loyal ally of my master, Inquisitor Hapshant, Aemos’s old
boss,’ I said, cutting to the chase before Aemos could get going.
‘A blast from the past, huh?’ she grinned.
‘Something like that.’
‘Still, it’s a lo-o-ong way to come just to catch up with an old friend,’ she
added.
‘Enough, Medea!’ I said. ‘You don’t need to know the particulars yet.
Maybe better for you if you don’t.’
She blew a raspberry at me and began to pull her flight suit back on.
‘You tried to reach the Essene recently?’ I asked.
‘‘My vox hasn’t got the range,’ she sulked back, fiddling with the zipper.
‘Gravity distortions are too much. We expected that. I could go back to the
cutter and use the main ‘caster.’
‘I need you here. We need to scare up some answers fast. I want you to
sneak Aemos down to the Administratum archive, and see if you can coax
anything out of the data banks, if they’re still functioning.’
‘While you...’
‘I’m going to the annex of the Adeptus Mechanicus. Meet back here in
three hours. We’re looking for any clues, but particularly any traces of
Bure’s whereabouts.’
Aemos nodded. ‘What if we’re challenged?’
‘You couldn’t sleep, you went for a walk, and you got lost.’
‘And if they don’t believe me?’
‘That’s why Medea’s going with you,’ I said.
THE ANNEX OF the tech-priesthood lay in the western sector of Cinchare
Minehead’s jumbled maze of pressurised habs and processing sheds, about
two kilometres from the plaza. At first, I hadn’t known where I was going,
but the tunnels and transit ways were marked with numbered signs and
symbol-coded notices, and after a while I found a large, etched-metal
directory map screwed to a pillar beside a bank of dusty public drinking
fountains.
A twist of the faucet on one of the fountains produced nothing but a dry
rasp.
Approaching the annex, the whitewashed tunnel walls were overpainted
with dark red stripes, and there were numerous caution signs and warnings
that demanded correct papers and identities on pain of death.
Still, the whole place was bare and empty, and thick with dust and litter.
At the end of the red-striped access tunnel, the vast adamantite blast-
gates to the annex stood open. There was an eerie silence.
The annex was a colossal tower of hewn rock dressed in red steel, filling
a side chimney of the crater that housed Cinchare’s minehead. A sealed
glass dome covered the paved yard between the blast-gates and the annex,
and the building itself rose up beyond the glass to the top of the crater rim.
High above, I could see the blue rock and the starlit void beyond. Meteors
streaked overhead.
The doorway of the annex was a giant portal taller than three men,
framed by thick dork columns of black lucullite. Above it leered the graven
image of the Machine God, its eyes clearly carved in such a way that they
would flare ominously with gas burn-offs piped up from the mines. They
were cold and dead now.
And the burnished metal doors of the portal were open.
I stepped inside. Fine sand covered the floor of the grand prothyron. Dust
motes glittered in the bars of light spearing into the high hallway through
deadlights up near the ribbed roof. Both walls were entirely panelled with
banks of codifiers and matriculators, all dormant and powered down.
Crescents of dust bearded every single switch and dial.
I knew at once this was a bad sign. The tech-priests treasured machines
more than anything else. If they had evacuated as Kaleil described, there
was no way they would have left such a wealth of technology here...
especially as each unit was clearly designed to slot out of its alcove in the
black marble walls.
The chamber beyond the prothyron was a veritable chapel, a cathedral
dedicated to the God-Machine, the uber-Titan, the master of Mars. The
floor was creamy travertine slabs, so tightly laid not even a sheet of paper
could be slipped between the stones. The chapel itself was triapsidal with
walls of smooth, cold lucullite and a roof thirty metres above my head.
There was yet more precious technology arranged in six concentric circles
of intricate brass workstations around a central plinth. All of it was dead
and unpowered.
I crossed the chamber towards the plinth, painfully aware of how loud
my footsteps rang back from the emptiness. Chilly starlight shone down
through an opaion in the centre of the roof, directly above the massive
grandiorite plinth. The huge, severed head of an ancient Warlord Titan hung
above the plinth where the starlight shafted down. I realised that nothing
supported the head – no cables, no platform, no scaffolding. It simply hung
in the air.
As I got close to the plinth, gazing up at the Titan’s face, my hair pricked.
Static, or something like it, bristled the atmosphere. Some invisible,
harnessed force – perhaps gravity or magnetics, certainly something beyond
my understanding – was at play here, suspending the multiple tonnes of the
machine-skull. It was a silent marvel, characteristic of the tech-priesthood.
Even with the power shut down, their miracles endured.
On one workstation console – a brass frame full of intermeshed iron
cogs, silvered wires and glass valves – I saw a length of canvas-sleeved
neural hose, one end plugged into the display, the other frayed and severed.
That was more than just a case of someone leaving in a hurry.
Over the years, my dealings with the Adeptus Mechanicus had been few.
They were a law unto themselves, like the Astartes, and only a fool would
meddle with their power. Bure – Magos Geard Bure – had been my closest
contact with them. Without the Priesthood of Mars, the technologies of the
Imperium would wither and perish, and without their ceaseless endeavours,
no new wonders would ever be added to mankind’s might.
Yet here I stood, unmolested and uninvited, in the middle of one of their
inner sanctums.
My vox-link pipped. A voice, Medea’s, badly distorted by gravity flux,
said ‘Aegis wishes Thorn. By halflife d—’
It cut off.
‘Thorn attends Aegis,’ I said. Nothing.
‘Thorn attends Aegis, the whisperless void.’
Still nothing. What little I had caught of Medea’s brief message troubled
me – ‘halflife’ was a Glossia code word that could be used in phrases to
disclose an important discovery or indicate a grave predicament. But what
troubled me far more was the fact she had cut off. My reply, if she had
heard it, indicated her transmission had been incomplete or garbled.
I waited a full minute, then another.
Without warning, my vox pipped quickly three times. Medea had test-
keyed her transmitter in a non-vocal code form that indicated she couldn’t
talk and that I should stand by.
I brushed the thin skin of dust off one dead workdesk and gazed at the
worn, rune-marked keyboard and the small display screens of thick, convex
glass, wondering what secrets I could possibly unlock from it.
Little, I decided. Aemos, who frankly knew more than it was healthy to
know, might have a chance. He had worked closely with Bure years before,
and I fancied he had more experience of the mysterious tech-priests and
their ways than he cared to admit.
My motion-tracker suddenly clicked around, and I tensed, pulling my
stub-nose laspistol. The tracker’s display on my mask’s right lens indicated
a movement or contact seventeen paces to my left, but even as I turned, it
flashed up more. Multiple contacts, all around, coming so fast that they
overlapped and utterly confused the tracker for a moment. The lens display
showed a default ‘00:00:00’ for a second as it struggled to compute the
vectors, and then it scrolled a tight column of coordinates in front of my
eye.
But by then, I knew what it had sensed.
The sanctum was coming to life.
In swift succession, each workstation chattered into action, cogs
whirring, valves glowing, screens lighting, pistons hissing. Pneumatic gas-
pumps exhaled and communiqué flasks began to pop and whizz through the
network of elegant glass-and-brass message tubes that ran between the
consoles and up the walls. Several desks projected small hologram images
above their hololith hubs: three dimensional strata maps, spectroscopy
graphs, sonar readings and oscillating wave-forms. Powerful underlights
ignited on the plinth-top beneath the floating head of the Titan and threw its
features into malevolent relief.
I sank down behind one of the stations, which vibrated and chattered
against my back. The sudden, inexplicable life was daunting and alarming.
Somewhere close by, one particular machine was rattling and repeating like
an old machine gun on full auto.
As suddenly as it had started, the life died away. Stations fell silent and
their lights went out. The throb of power leaked away into the darkness.
The Titan’s underlights dimmed and died. One by one, the holograms
extinguished and the desks fell dormant. The chirring of cogs and servos
and the throb of valves ebbed into stillness.
The last sound to go was that autogun racket. It continued for a good few
seconds after everything else had stopped, then it too ceased abruptly.
The chapel was then as dark and quiet as it had been when I first entered.
I got to my feet. There had been no power in this place, no feeding
source. What had started and woken the machines? It had to have been
some signal from outside.
Using commonsense and guesswork, I went around the circle of stations
nearest to me, hunting for the one that had chattered like a stubber. The
most likely candidate was a bulky desk that seemed to have external and
general gain vox functions. But its keys were dead to my touch.
On a whim, I got down on my knees and peered behind the desk. There
were fixings where a basket hopper should have been sitting to catch the
print-outs. The hopper was missing. The sheaf of print-out had fallen down
into the dust under the desk.
I scooped the sheaf out. It was about nine metres long, punch-cut by the
printer’s jaws into shorter sections. Clearly this desk had been disgorging
print-outs for some time without anyone around to collect them. The
sections at the bottom of the spool were beginning to yellow.
I looked them over, but they meant nothing. Tabulated columns of
machine code in close, regular bands. Carefully, I laid them out on the
travertine floor and rolled them tightly into a thick scroll.
I was nearly finished when my vox pipped.
‘Aegis wishes thorn. By halflight disabused, in Administratum by heart.
Scales fall from eyes. Multifarious, the grasp of changelings. Pattern
thimble advised.’
‘Pattern thimble acknowledged. Thorn arising by heart.’
Medea’s words had told me all I needed to know. They had found
something in the Administratum, and they needed me back swiftly. There
was danger from Chaos all around. I should trust no one.
I bolstered my laspistol and tucked the print-out scroll into my
waistband.
As I ran out of the annex and down the red-striped tunnel, I tugged my
combat shotgun out over my shoulder and racked the slide.
EIGHTEEN
Pattern thimble.
Going rockside.
Geard Bure’s translithopede.
GLOSSIA’S NOT SO hard to understand. It uses subliminal symbols and
‘head words’. Don’t look for a mystery in it, it isn’t there. That’s why it
works so well as a private code. There is no encryption – at least no
mathematical encryption – to be calculated and broken. It is idiomatic and
visceral. It is verbal impressionism. It uses the uncalculable, unregulated
mechanisms of poetry and intimacy to perform its functions. There have
been times in the last – well, the increasing years of my career, let’s say –
there have been times when an ally or retainer of mine has sent me a
Glossia message using terms and words that have never been used before.
And still, I have understood them.
It’s a knack. It’s knowing how to use, and improvise, a shared cant. There
are basic rules of construction and metaphor, of course, but Glossia’s
strength lies in its nebulous vagueness. Its idioms. Its resonance. It is akin
to the gut-slang of the Ermenoes, who have replaced language with
subtleties of skin-colour.
Pattern thimble, for example.
‘Pattern’ indicates a course of action or behaviour. ‘Thimble’ is a
qualifier, disclosing the manner or mode of said action. A thimble is a small
tin cap that you might use to protect your finger from the short, sharp stabs
of a needle during darning. It wouldn’t fend off, say, an atomic strike or a
horde of genestealers. But, in the idiom of Glossia, it would seal you
against sudden, spearing, close attacks. It is also quiet and unremarkable.
And so, quietly, unremarkably, I slipped down the tunnel ways of
Cinchare Minehead towards the officium of the Administratum. I was
stealthy and secretive, and my motion tracker and shotgun were my
thimble.
Pattern thimble. Gideon Ravenor had coined that particular phrase,
adding it to the vocabulary of my Glossia.
I thought of Ravenor, alone in his plastic-sheeted cot on Thracian. My
anger, dimmed these last few months, welled.
MY MOTION TRACKER warned me into cover at a junction of transit
tunnels about half a kilometre from the plaza. Hidden behind a stack of
empty promethium drums, I watched as two electric buggies buzzed past,
heading towards the concourse area. Bandelbi was driving the lead one.
There were two miners with him, and three more in the buggy behind. They
all looked grimy and slovenly.
THERE WERE MORE buggies in the plaza, parked out in front of the security
office. I saw a couple of labourer-types lounging in the building doorway,
smoking lho-sticks.
I slipped into the miner’s welfare through the back. Medea and Aemos
were waiting for me in the shabby rec-room billet.
‘Well?’
‘We nosed around the Administratum,’ said Aemos. ‘It wasn’t even
locked.’
‘Then the place started to crawl with Kaleil’s people and we skedaddled,’
said Medea. Both of them looked tense and pensive.
‘They see you?’
She shook her head. ‘But there is a damn sight more than twenty of them.
I counted thirty, thirty-five at least.’
‘What did you find?’
‘Recent archives are non-existent, or they’ve been erased,’ said Aemos.
‘Nothing for the last two and a half months, not even a caretaking log, the
sort of thing you’d expect Kaleil to have been obliged to keep.’
‘He could be recording it at the security office.’
‘If he was following official protocol, it would have been automatically
copied to the central archives. You know how anal the Administratum is
about keeping full records.’
‘What else?’
‘Well, it was a cursory examination – we didn’t have much time. But
Kaleil told us Imperial Allied pulled out nine months ago and Ortog
Promethium followed them two months later. According to the archive,
both corporations were active, working and fully crewed as recently as
three months ago. There’s no record of any “Grav” cases, nor any filed
reports or memos about the possibility of such a problem.’
‘Kaleil was lying?’
‘In all respects.’
‘So where is everyone?’
Aemos shrugged.
‘Do we leave now?’ Medea asked.
‘I’m determined to find Bure,’ I replied, ‘and there’s something afoot
here that really ought to—’
‘Gregor,’ Aemos murmured. ‘I hate to be the one to point this out, but
this isn’t your concern. Although I know full well you are as loyal to the
Golden Throne now as you ever were, in most respects that matter, you’re
no longer an inquisitor. Your authority is no longer recognised by the
Imperium. You’re a rogue... a rogue with more than enough problems of
your own to sort out without involving yourself in this.’
I think he expected me to be angry. I wasn’t.
‘You’re right... but I can’t just stop being a servant of the Emperor, not
just like that, no matter what the rest of mankind believes me to be. If I can
do any good here, I will. I don’t care about recognition, or official
sanction.’
‘I told you he’d say that,’ Medea sneered at Aemos.
‘Yes, you did. She did,’ he said, looking back at me.
‘Sorry to be so predictable.’
‘Moral constancy is nothing to apologise for,’ said Aemos.
I took the scroll of paper I’d recovered from the annex and showed it to
my old savant.
‘What do you make of this?’ I told them what had happened in the
sanctum of the Machine-God.
He studied the curling sheaf for a few minutes, checking back and forth.
‘There are elements of this machine code that I can’t make out. Adeptus
encryption. But... well, look at the text breaks. These are the filed records of
regular transmissions from outside the minehead. Every... six hours, to the
second.’
‘And the sanctum’s dormant systems would wake up the moment an
external transmission came in?’
‘In order to record it, yes. How long were the machines in life?’
I shook my head. ‘Two, maybe two and half minutes.’
‘Two minutes forty-eight seconds?’ he asked.
‘Could be.’
He ran his finger along a line of header text above the last code-burst.
‘That’s exactly how long the latest transmission lasted.’
‘So someone’s out there? Outside the minehead on Cinchare somewhere,
sending regular transmissions back to the Adeptus annex?’
‘Not just someone... it’s Bure. This is the Adeptus code-form for his
name,’ Aemos leafed back through the sheets and studied the yellowest and
oldest. ‘He’s been broadcasting for... eleven weeks.’
‘What is he saying?’
‘I’ve no idea. The main text is too deeply codified. Mechanilingua-A or
C or possibly some modern revision of one of the hexadecimal servito-ware
scripts. Possibly Impulse Analog version nine. I can’t—’
‘You can’t read it. That’s enough for me.’
‘All right. But I know where he is.’
‘I paused. You do?’
Aemos smiled and adjusted his heavy augmetic eyewear. ‘Well, no. I
don’t actually know where he is. But I can find him.’
‘How?’
He pointed to a vertical strip of coloured bars that ran down the side of
each transmission burst. ‘Each broadcast is routinely accompanied by a
spectrographic report on the location of the transmitter. These colours are a
condensed expression of the type, mix and density of the rock surrounding
him. It’s like a fingerprint. If I had a good quality strata map of Cinchare,
and a geologicae auspex, I could track him down.’
I smiled. ‘I knew there was a reason I kept you around.’
‘So we’re going after him?’ asked Medea.
‘Yes, we are. We’ll need transport. A prospecting pod, maybe. Can you
handle one of those?’
‘Piece of cake. Where do we get one?’
‘Imperial Allied has an excursion terminal full of them,’ Aemos said. ‘I
saw a schematic guide of the minehead screwed to a wall.’ I had seen just
the same sort of thing, but I didn’t recall a detail like that. It reminded me of
the extraordinary photo-memory Aemos possessed.
‘What about the chart and auspex you said you’ll need?’ Medea asked.
‘Any prospector machine will have an on-board mineralogicae or
geologicae scanner,’ said Aemos. ‘That will suffice. A comprehensive
chart, though, that’ll be less of a certainty. We’d better make sure we have
one before we set off.’
He sat down on his cot and began to adjust the settings of his wrist-
mounted data-slate.
‘What are you doing?’ I asked, sitting down next to him.
‘Downloading a chart from the security office’s cogitorum.’
‘Can you do that?’ Medea asked.
‘It’s simple enough. Despite the gravities, my slate’s vox-link has enough
range to communicate with the office’s codifier. I can make a text-bridge
and ask it to send its chart files.’
‘Yeah, yeah, but can you do that without knowing the system’s user-
code?’ Medea asked.
‘No,’ said Aemos. ‘But fortunately, I do know it.’
‘How come?’
‘It was on a note taped to the edge of the central control desk. Didn’t you
see it?’
Both Medea and I shook our heads and smiled. Just sitting there with
Kaleil, talking and sipping fifth-rate amasec, Aemos had soaked up and
memorised every detail of the place.
‘One question,’ Medea said. ‘We don’t know what’s going on here, but
it’s probably a safe bet your friend is no friend of Kaleil and his pals. If we
can find him using this, why haven’t they?’
‘I doubt even an experienced miner could make much sense of this
spectroscopy expression. It’s an Adeptus code,’ Aemos said, proudly.
‘It’s simpler than that,’ I said. ‘They haven’t found it. The annex was
covered in dust, undisturbed. I don’t think Kaleil or any of his people have
been into the annex. Fear of the Adeptus Mechanicus is a strong
disincentive. They don’t know what we know.’
IN THE NIGHT, they came to kill us.
Once Aemos had downloaded the chart – and several other files of data
besides – we resolved to get a few hours’ sleep before making our move.
I had been asleep for about a hour when I woke in the dark to find
Medea’s fingers stroking my cheek.
As soon as I stirred, she pinched my lips shut tight.
‘Spectres, invasive, spiral vine,’ she whispered.
My eyes became accustomed to the half-light. Aemos was snoring.
I rose off my cot and heard what Medea had heard: the stairs outside the
rec-room creaking. Medea was pulling on her flight suit, but keeping her
needle pistol aimed at the door.
I pulled my laspistol from its holster on the floor and then leant over to
Aemos, putting my hand over his mouth.
His eyes flicked open.
‘Keep snoring but get ready to move,’ I whispered into his ear.
Aemos struggled up, snorting out fake snores as he collected up his robe
and cane.
I had stripped down to my vest. My jacket and motion tracker were on
the floor at the foot of the cot. There was no time to reach for them.
Someone kicked the door in. The bright blue lances of two laser sights
stabbed into the rec-room, and a tight burst of stubber fire blew holes in my
vacated cot and puffed padding fibres up from the wounds in the mattress.
Medea and I returned fire, bracketing the doorway with about a dozen
shots between us. Two dark shapes toppled backwards. Someone screamed
in pain.
A flurry of gunfire from ground level outside slammed up in through the
windows, blowing one of them right out of its mounting in a shower of
glascite. Ruined slat-blinds rippled and jiggled with the impacts.
‘Back!’ I cried, firing twice at a shape in the doorway. A triple pulse of
answering las-fire scorched past my head.
But light flooded in behind us as a rear door crashed open. Medea swung
around, lithe and long-limbed, and broke in the face of the first intruder
with a high kick that sent him reeling back.
Figures charged in from the doors before and behind us. I shot two, but
then was carried over onto my back by two more who struggled frantically
to rip the laspistol out of my hand. I kneed one in the groin and shot him
through the neck as he coiled away.
The other one had his hands on my throat.
I speared my mind right into his and triggered a massive cerebral
haemorrhage that burst his eyeballs and sent him slack.
The smell of blood and cordite and the miners’ unwashed bodies was
intense. Medea danced back, and delivered a forearm slam to the face of
another assassin that made him stumble and gasp.
She flexed and delivered a spin-kick which hit him so hard he smashed
back out of the window.
Another was coming at her from behind. I saw a knife blade flash in the
gloom.
Aemos, slow but steady, swung round and broke the knife-man’s neck
with a single punch. Another thing too easy to underestimate about my old
savant was the inhuman strength his augmetic exo-chassis provided.
There was a little more wild gunfire, and then the spitting sound of
Medea’s Glavian pistol.
I curved my back and sprang back onto my feet in time to gun down a
man with a shotgun who was coming in through the door.
Silence. Drifting smoke.
Voices were shouting below on the plaza.
‘Grab your things!’ I ordered. ‘We’re going right now!’
HALF-DRESSED AND lugging the rest of our kit, we scrambled down the
back stairs. The body of one miner shot by Medea lay crumpled on the steps
under the first landing. The front of his Ortog Promethium overalls was
soaked with blood.
There was a livid birthmark on the side of his awkwardly twisted neck.
‘Look familiar?’ asked Aemos.
It did.
‘Didn’t that creep Bandelbi have a birthmark too?’ Medea asked.
‘Most certainly,’ I replied.
WE BROKE OUR way through a series of cluttered storerooms and came
out in an access alley behind the shops adjoining the welfare. A ginger-
haired miner posted as rearguard for the ambush turned in surprise as we
emerged, his hands fumbling with the shotgun slung over his shoulder on a
leather strap.
Drop it and come here! I said, using my will.
He tossed the weapon down and trotted over to us, his eyes glazed and
confused.
Show me your neck! I willed again.
He brushed up his tousled hair with one hand and tugged his worksuit’s
neckline down with the other. The birthmark was there, centred on his nape.
‘We haven’t got time for this!’ Aemos said. Running footsteps were
pounding through the building behind us and we could hear shouts and
curses.
‘Where did you get this mark?’ I willed at the ginger-haired man.
‘Kaleil gave it me,’ he said slackly.
What does it mean?
Driven by my undeniable will-force, he tried to say something that the
rest of his mind and soul simply forbade. It sounded like ‘Lith’ but it was
impossible to say for sure as the effort killed him.
‘Dammit, Gregor! We have to go!’ Aemos roared.
As if to prove his point, two miners burst out of the doorway we had
come through, aiming autorifles. Medea and I whipped around as one and
dropped them both, one kill shot each.
AEMOS’S FAULTLESS RECALL led us through the winding sub-streets of
Cinchare Minehead to the massive, dank bulk of Imperial Allied. There was
a hue and cry behind us, mixed with the whine of electric buggies.
We ran across the plant’s wide, metal drawbridge, through a rockcrete
gatehouse festooned with razorwire, and on down through the echoing
entrance hall.
Footsteps followed.
THE EXCURSION TERMINAL was a semi-circular barn of corrugated steel
overlooking the mouth of the main working. Six prospecting pods sat in
oily iron cradles under the barn’s roof. They were slug-shaped machines,
painted in the silver and khaki colours of Imperial Allied. Each one had a
rack of flood and spotlights mounted above the cockpit, and several large
servo arms and locator dishes arrayed under the chin.
‘That one!’ Medea yelled, heading for the third in line. She was still
trying to fasten her flight suit properly. I carried my jacket and motion
tracker. There had been no time to stop and get dressed.
‘Why this one?’ I yelled, following her.
‘The power hoses are all still attached and it’s showing green across the
board on the telltales! Unclamp the hoses!’
I threw my stuff to Aemos, who hurried aboard behind Medea through
the small side hatch, and ran to where three thick power cables were
attached to the multi-socket in the flank of the pod. Just as Medea had
noticed, all the indicator lights above the socket were green.
I twisted the valves and pulled them free, one by one. The last one was
reluctant and needed a moment of brute force.
Las-shots spanked into the hull casing beside me.
I jerked the hose free and then turned, firing back down the length of the
barn terminal. The pod’s attitude thrusters began to cough and wheeze as
Medea brought the craft to life.
Solid and las-shots peppered around me. I ran to the hatch and climbed
in. Medea was at the helm in the cramped cockpit.
‘Go!’ I cried, slamming the hatch shut.
‘Come on! Come on!’ Medea cursed at the pod’s controls. The over-
urged engines whined painfully.
‘Cradle lock!’ Aemos spluttered desperately.
Realising her mistake, Medea swore expertly, eased the power down a
tad, and threw a greasy yellow lever on the right-hand bulkhead. There was
a jarring clank as the locking cuff that held the pod tight in the cradle
disengaged.
‘Sorry,’ she grinned.
Freed, the pod lifted out of its landing cradle, swayed to the right as
gunfire hunted for it, and then accelerated away, into the lightless mouth of
the mine tunnels.
THE UPPER WORKINGS of the Imperial Allied mines were huge excavations
reinforced with rockcrete and filled with abandoned mining machines.
Medea kicked in the pod’s lamp array and illuminated our path with hard
spot-beams of clear white light. At the far end of one reinforced spur, the
lamps picked out a sudden, wide gradient where the horizontal incuts of the
surface mines began their descent. Running down the steep slope were
derelict cable-trams of filthy ore-hoppers and a funicular railway for
transporting workcrews to the lower faces.
Aemos sat behind us in the pod’s small cabin, reviewing the charts he
had obtained from the security office. ‘Continue down,’ was all he said.
The steep access bore descended for about a kilometre and a half,
occasionally flattening into work-shelves with entries to side seams. The
view through the front screen seemed to be in black and white: the fierce
white light piercing the blackness and revealing only pale grey dust and
rock, and the occasional sparkle of druse.
Medea slowed us as we passed over more fragmented and extensive piles
of breakdown and then, under Aemos’s instruction, manoeuvred us down
into the throat of an almost vertical chimney. This chimney – a pitch in
mining terms – was a natural formation, possibly an ancient lava tube.
Slowly revolving laterally, we hovered down into it. Flowstone caked the
walls like swathes of creamy drapery and quilled bushes of volcanic glass
sprouted from outcrops. The space was small, even for a compact pod like
the one we had borrowed. Occasionally, Medea would nudge or clip an out
thrust of quills and the glass fragments would fall silently, glittering, into
the pit below.
About two kilometres down, the pitch opened out into a complex series
of curving tubes, sub-caves and sumps. It was like moving out of an
oesophagus into the complex chambers of an intestinal tract. The flow-stone
started to show more colour: steely blues with milky calcite swirls, mottled
reds glinting with oolites. Flinty black druse and other clastic litter covered
the smoothed folds of the ancient floor.
Medea pointed my attention to the small scanner box mounted below the
main petrographic assayer. The little screen was awash with an almost
indecipherable graphic of ghosting strata layers and reflecting lithic
densities. Three bright yellow cursors showed clearly in the upper quadrant.
‘They’re coming after us,’ she said.
‘They seem to know where we are right enough. How are they tracking
us?’
‘Same way we’re getting such a clean return on their position.’
‘Are the locators on this crate that powerful?’
Medea shook her head. ‘They’re fine for the immediate locality, but
they’ve got nowhere near enough gain to penetrate the rock.’
‘So?’
‘I think all these prospector pods have high-powered beacons, probably
built into flight recorders. They’d need them for routine search and
recovery.’
‘I’ll take a look.’
I swung out of my seat and moved back down the pod, stooping, and
using the overhead hand-rails to support myself. Aemos was still at work.
He’d fired up the pod’s mineralogicae auspex, and was running a complex
cross-search for the spectographic fingerprints that appeared on the Adeptus
Mechanicus transmissions. He didn’t even have the scrolls open any more:
the complex subtleties of the colour bars had long since been committed to
memory.
Every few minutes, he consulted the main chart and called a course-
correction to Medea.
At the rear of the pod, between racks holding old rebreathers with
perishing rubber visor-seals, I found a small crawl space into the engine
bay.
I stuck my head and shoulders inside, and shone around with a lamp-pack
I’d unbuckled from one of the rebreather sets. A simple process of
elimination directed me to a fat metal drum clamped to the underside of the
gravitic assembly and the housing for the kinaesthetic gyroscopes. Adeptus
Mechanicus purity seals secured its cover.
I slid back out into the cabin, selected a medium plasma cutter from the
tool web, and went back in. The hot blue tongue of the cutter sliced the
drum’s cover off and fused its pulsing innards.
Back in the cockpit, I saw we were now travelling down a wide cavern
that was barbed with oily dripstones and varnished with incandescent
blooms of moon-milk and angel’s hair.
‘They look lost already,’ Medea remarked, nodding at the scanner box.
She was right. The yellow cursors were moving with nothing like the same
confidence. They were milling, trying to reacquire our signal.
WE TRAVELLED FOR two more hours, through small flask-chambers
gleaming with cavepearls, across vast low seas of chert and lapilli, between
massive stalactites that bit tunnels in two like the incisors of prediluvial
monsters. Domepits and sumps sheened with brackish alkaline water and
the smoke snaking from nests of fumaroles betrayed the fact that there was
now a rudimentary atmosphere: methane, sulphur, radon and pockets of
carbon monoxide. Venting cases from Cinchare’s active heart and the gas-
products of chemical and gravito-chemical reactions built and collected
here, far below ground, leaking only slowly up to the airless surface. Hull
temperature was increasing. We were now about fifteen kilometres down,
and beginning to feel the effects of the asthenosphere.
‘Hey!’ said Medea suddenly.
She slowed the pod, and swung it around, traversing the lights. We were
in a gypnate chamber where the chert-covered floor was scalloped by
several gours formed by water eons before. Several side spurs led away into
tight pinches or were revealed on the chart to pinch out no further than
twenty metres in.
‘What did you see?’ I asked.
‘There!’
The spot-lamps framed a black shape that I thought for a moment was
just a jagged pile of boulders and stalagmite bosses. But Medea roved us in.
It was a prospecting pod, similar to ours, but bearing the crest of Ortog
Promethium. It had been crushed and split like an old can, the stanchions of
its cabin protruding from the metal hull like ribs.
‘Hell...’ Medea murmured.
‘Mining’s a dangerous job,’ I said.
‘That’s recent,’ Aemos said, appearing at our shoulders. ‘Look at the
tephra.’
‘The what?’ asked Medea.
‘It’s a generic term for clastic materials. The dust and shale bed the
wreck’s lying on. Move the lamp round. There. The tephra’s yellowish-
white gypnate all around, but it’s scorched and fused under the wreck.
Mineral smoke from the fumaroles we passed just now vent back down here
and cover everything with oxidised dust. I’d wager if it’s been there more
than a month, the powder would have overlaid the scorching... and coated
the wreck.’
‘Pop the hatch,’ I said.
THE SUBTERRANEAN ATMOSPHERE seemed scalding hot and I began to
sweat freely the moment I jumped down from the sill. I could hear nothing
except my breath rasping inside my rebreather mask. I trudged round to the
front of the hovering pod into the cones of its lights, and saw Aemos and
Medea in the lit cockpit, both hidden behind rebreather masks of their own.
I waved once and crunched off over the dusty sill, my bootcaps catching
the occasional geode which scattered and flashed in the light.
There was no mistaking the blast holes in the wreck’s hull. Sustained fire
from a multi-laser had split the pod wide open. I shone my hand torch in
through the rents and saw a blackened cabin space, burned out.
The three crew members were still in there, at their posts, reduced to
grimacing mummies by the acidic air, and by the hundreds of glistening
white worms that writhed and burrowed as my light hit them. It figured that
with its hot, wet, gaseous interior, Cinchare was a far from dead world.
More troglodyte things scurried and squirmed around my feet. Long-
legged metallic beetles and inflated, jelly-like molluscs, all drawn to this
unexpected source of rich nutrients.
Something moved beside me and slammed into my left hip. I fell hard
against the broken hull, cursing that I hadn’t been wearing my motion
tracker. It came in again, and this time I felt a sharp pain in my left thigh. I
kicked out with a mask-muffled curse.
It was about the size of a large dog, but longer and lower, moving on lean
hind limbs. Its skin was nearly silver, and its eyeless head was just a vast set
of jaws filled with hundreds of transparent fangs. All around the maw, long
sensory bristles and tendrils twitched and rippled.
It lunged again, its thin, stiff tail raised high as a counterbalance. This
thing, I guessed, was top of the food chain in Cinchare’s lightless cavities.
Too big to force its way inside the wreck to get at the corpses, it had been
lurking outside, feeding on the carrion worms and molluscs that had
congregated on the crash.
With a twist of its head, it had a good grip on my left ankle. I could feel
the tips of its teeth biting through the heavy leather of my boot.
I managed to tug my shotgun from the scabbard on my back and shoot it
through the torso at point black range. Viscous tissues and filmy flesh
scattered in all directions and the thing flopped over. By the time I had
prized its jaws off my boot with my knife, the carrion-eaters had begun to
swarm over it and feed.
WE MOVED OFF again, down a gour-lined spur and into a cavern
breathtakingly encrusted with glass-silk and billions of cavepearls.
‘There’s been fighting down here,’ I told Aemos and Medea, raising my
voice to be heard over the re-cycling cabin air as we pumped the last of the
coarse Cinchare gas-soup out.
‘Who’s fighting who?’
I shrugged, and sat back to tug one of the predator’s broken fangs out of
my boot leather.
‘Well,’ said Aemos, ‘You’ll be interested to know that the cavern with the
wreck in it matched one of the spectroscope traces from the Mechanicus
transmissions exactly.’
‘How long ago?’
‘About two weeks.’
‘So... Bure could have been the one who did the shooting.’
‘Bure... or whoever’s sending transmissions back to the annex.’
‘But why would he take out a prospector pod?’ I wondered aloud.
‘Rather depends on what the prospector pod was trying to do to him,’
said Medea.
Aemos raised his tufty eyebrows. ‘Most perturbatory.’
ANOTHER THREE HOURS, another two kilometres down. It was damn hot,
and the air outside was thick with venting steams and gases. Fumaroles,
some large, some in scabby clusters, belched black smoke into the caves,
riddling some areas like honeycomb. Several caverns and domepits were
home to luminous acidic lakes, where the geothermals steadily simmered
the water. Gorges and the occasional pitch showed flares of red light from
lava rivers and asthenospheric cauldrons of molten rock.
We no longer had to rely on the lamps. The cave systems were lit by
streams of glowing magma, flaming lakes of pitch and promethium and
thick, sticky curtains and rafts of bio-luminescent fungi that thrived in the
heated ducts. The pod’s air-scrubbers were no longer able to remove the
scent of sulphur from the cabin air, and the cooling system was inadequate.
We were all sweating, and so were the interior walls of the cabin.
Condensation dribbled down the bare metal of the hull’s inner skin.
‘Dead stop, please,’ Aemos said.
Medea cut the thrusters and let us coast slowly over a seething lake of
lava that radiated a glare of almost neon brilliance from beneath its
blackened crust.
Aemos checked the chart against the spectroscope readings that the
mineralogicae assayer was sending to a small repeater screen in the cabin
bay.
‘This is it. The source location for the last transmission.’
‘You’re sure?’ I asked.
He gave me a withering look. ‘Of course.’
‘Swing us around, slowly,’ I told Medea. We craned to look out of the
pod’s front ports, playing the lamp array up and down to make sense of the
stark shadows in the cavern walls.
‘What are those? Tube tunnels?’
‘Auspex says they pinch out in a few hundred metres. God-Emperor, it
looks pretty primordial out there!’ Medea wiped a trickle of perspiration out
of her eyes.
‘What’s that the lights are catching there?’
Aemos peered to where I was pointing. ‘Amygdules,’ he said. ‘Cavities
filled with quartzes or other secondary minerals.’
‘Okay,’ said Medea, unscrewing the stopper of a water-flask. ‘Seeing as
how you know everything... what’s that?’
‘Well, I... most perturbatory.’
It was a hole, perfectly circular, thirty metres in diameter, cut into the far
rock wall.
‘Edge closer,’ I said. ‘That’s not a natural formation. It’s too... precise.’
‘What the hell made a hole like that?’ Medea murmured, nudging us in.
‘An industrial mining drill could—’
‘This far down? This far from any mine infrastructure?’ I cut Aemos
short. ‘Look at this place. Only sealed units like this pod can function at this
depth.’
‘Barely,’ Medea commented, ominously. She was keeping a weather eye
on the hull-integrity read-out. Amber runes were twitching on and off.
‘It’s deep,’ I said. I looked at the display for the forward scanners. ‘Goes
off as far as we can read and maintains its shape and size.’
‘But it’s cut sheer through igneous rock... through the side of a forty
kilometre square batholyth! That’s solid anthragate!’ There was a note of
confusion in Aemos’s frail old voice.
‘I’ve got tremors,’ said Medea suddenly. The needles on the rolling
seismograph had been scratching away for a good hour or more, such was
the background instability this deep down. But now they were skritching
back and forth wildly.
‘There’s a pattern to them,’ Aemos said. ‘That’s not tectonic. That’s too
regular... mechanical almost.’
I paused for a moment, considering our options. ‘Take us into the shaft,’ I
said.
Medea looked at me, as if she was hoping she’d misheard me.
‘Let’s go.’
THE CUT SHAFT was so perfectly circular it was scary. As we sped down,
we could see that the inner surface of the tube was fused like flowstone,
with radiating patterns of furrows scooped into it.
‘This was plasma-cut,’ said Aemos. ‘And whatever cut it, left an
impression of its motivators in the rock before it cooled and hardened.’
The tube snaked occasionally, whilst maintaining its form. The bends
were long and slow, but Medea took them cautiously. The seismograph was
still jiggling.
I took out a holoquill and wrote a phrase down on the back of a chart-
pad.
‘Can you convert this into simple machine code?’ I asked Aemos.
He looked at it. ‘Hmmm... “Vade elquum alatoratha semptus”... you have
a good memory.’
‘Can you do it?’
‘Of course.’
‘What is that?’ asked Medea. ‘Some kind of sorcery?’
‘No,’ I smiled as Aemos got to work. ‘It’s like Glossia. A private
language, one that hasn’t been used in a long time.’
‘There,’ said Aemos.
‘Punch it into the vox-ponder and set it to continuous repeat,’ I said.
‘I hope this works,’ said Aemos. ‘I hope you’re right.’
‘So do I,’ I said.
Instrumentation pinged. ‘We’re approaching the end of the bore-hole!’
Medea called. ‘Another kilometre, and then we’re out into a huge cavity!’
‘Get that signal going!’ I urged my elderly savant.
WE WERE ON it almost before we were ready. A massive tube of
machined metal, thirty metres in diameter and seventy long, with a huge
plasma cutting-screw at the front end and rows of claw-like impellers that
cycled down its flanks like the active teeth of a gigantic chainsword. It had
cut its way from the tube and was grumbling across the clastic silt of the
chamber floor away from us, pumping thick clouds of vaporised rock and
steam out behind it.
‘Emperor protect me! It’s huge!’ Aemos exclaimed.
‘What in the name of the Golden Throne is that?’ gasped Medea.
‘Slow down! Slow down!’ I cried, but she was already braking us back
behind the leviathan.
‘Oh crap!’ said Medea. Recessed hardpoints along the giant’s flank had
swivelled and opened, and multi-laser batteries had popped out to target us.
I grabbed the vox-set’s hand-mic.
‘Vade elquum alatoratha semptus!’ I yelled into the mic. ‘Vade elquum
alatoratha semptus!’
The weapons – which could have obliterated us in a single salvo – did
not fire. They remained trained on us, however. Then heavy shutter doors
on the back end of the enormous machine opened slowly, revealing a small,
well-lit hangar space.
‘We won’t get another invitation!’ I told Medea.
With a worried shrug, she steered us inside.
I LED THE pair of them out of the pod into the arched dock-bay. The
shutters had locked shut behind us, and pungent sulphurous fog pooled
around our feet as it was pulled out of the bay by chugging air processors.
The bay was of a grand design, fluted with brass fittings and brushed
steel. There was a brand new prospector pod, painted oxide-red, in the
docking cradle next to the one that had received our singed specimen. Three
other cradles, new and black with oil, lay vacant. All the light came from
phosphorescent gas filaments in caged glass hoods around the room, and
the effect was a flickering, lambent glow. An iron screwstair with padded
leather rails led up to a boarding platform above us.
‘That’s a good sign,’ I said. The bas-relief roundel of the Adeptus
Mechanicus was visible above the inner door lock on the platform.
We all started as long servitor arms whirred out from compartments in
the walls. In a second, six were trained on us: two with auspex sensors,
sniffing us, and four with weapon mounts.
‘I suggest we don’t move,’ I whispered.
The inner lock clanked and opened. A hooded figure in long orange robes
seemed to hover out onto the platform. It grasped the handrail with both
hands and looked down at us.
‘Vade smeritus valsara esm,’ it growled.
‘Vade elquum alatoratha semptus,’ I replied. ‘Valsarum esoque quonda
tasabae.’
The figure pulled back its hood, revealing a mechanical skull finished in
oil-smudged chrome. Its lens-like eyes glowed bright green. Fat black
cables under its jaw pulsed and the vox-caster screwed into its throat spoke.
‘Gregor... Liber... It’s been a long time.’
NINETEEN
Walking through stone.
Lith.
The Inmate.
‘THIS IS MEDEA Betancore,’ I said, once Geard Bure’s strong mechanical
grip had finally released my hand.
‘Miss Betancore,’ Bure bowed slightly. ‘The Adeptus Mechanicus of
Mars, holy servants of the God-Machine, bids you take sanctuary in this, its
worthy device.’
I was about to hiss at Medea and explain that she had been greeted
formally, but, typically, she needed no prompting.
She deftly made the machine-fist salute of the Mechanicus and bowed in
return. ‘May your devices and desires serve the God-Emperor until time
runs its course, magos.’
Bure chuckled – an eerie sound when it came from a prosthetic voice-box
– and turned his unblinking green eye-lights to me.
‘You’ve trained this one well, Eisenhorn.’
‘I—’
‘He has, magos,’ said Medea quickly. ‘But that response I learned from
study of the Divine Primer.’
‘You’ve read the Primer?’ Bure asked.
‘It was basic study in air school on my home world,’ she replied.
‘Medea has a... considerable aptitude for machines,’ Aemos said. ‘She is
our pilot.’
‘Indeed...’ Bure walked around her and uninhibitedly caressed her body
with his metal fingers. Medea temporarily humoured him.
‘She is machine-wise, yet she has no augmentation?’ Bure questioned
me.
Medea stripped off her gloves and showed him the intricate circuits inlaid
into her hands.
‘I beg to differ, magos.’
He took her hands in his and gazed in hungry wonder. Drool-like ropes of
clear lubricant oil trickled out between his chrome teeth like spittle.
‘A Glavian! Your enhancements are... so... beautiful...’
‘Thank you, sir.’
‘You’ve never thought to permit any other augmentation? Limbs?
Organs? It is quite liberating.’
‘I... get by with what I’ve got,’ smiled Medea.
‘I’m sure you do,’ Bure said, suddenly swinging round to face me.
‘Welcome to my translithopede, Eisenhorn. You too, Aemos, my old friend.
I must admit I can’t conceive what brought you here. Is it the Lith? Has the
Inquisition sent you to deal with the Lith?’
News of my disgrace clearly hadn’t reached him, and for that, I was
thankful.
‘No, magos,’ I said. ‘A stranger quirk has brought us here.’
‘Has it? How odd. When I first detected your signal – in dear Hapshant’s
old private code – I couldn’t believe it. I nearly shot you down.’
‘I took a chance,’ I said.
‘Well, that chance has led you to me and I’m glad. Come, this way.’
His skeletal silver hands ushered us towards the door lock.
Bure had no lower limbs. He floated on anti-gravity suspensors, the hem
of his orange robe hanging a few centimetres above the plated deck. We fell
in step behind him and walked the length of a long, oval companion-way
lined with brass bulkheads and more gas filament lamps.
‘This burrowing machine is a wonder,’ Aemos said.
‘All machines are wonders,’ Bure replied. This is a necessity, the primary
tool of my work here on Cinchare. There were, of course, a number of
lesser prototypes before I made the necessary refinements. This
translithopede was engineered from my designs by the Adeptus fabricatory
on Rysa and shipped here for my use three standard years ago. With it, I can
go where I please in this rock, and unlock the secret lore of Cinchare’s
metals.’
Magos Bure had been a metallurgy specialist for two hundred years, his
knowledge and discoveries almost worshipped by his brethren in the tech-
priesthood. Before that, he had been a fabricator-architect in the titan forges
of Triplex Phall. To my certain knowledge, he was almost seven hundred
years old. Hapshant had occasionally hinted that Bure was far older than
that.
Not a shred of the magos’s flesh remained. The vestigial organic parts of
Geard Bure the human being – his brain and neural systems – were sealed
inside his gleaming mechanoid body. I had never learned if this was a
matter of design or necessity. Perhaps, as is the case with so many, disease
or grievous injury had forced such extreme augmentation upon him. Or
perhaps, like Tobias Maxilla, he had deliberately discarded the weakness of
flesh in favour of machine perfection. Knowing the technophiliac
disposition of the Mechanicus priesthood, the latter seemed more likely to
me.
My late mentor, Inquisitor Hapshant, had encountered Magos Bure in the
early part of his career, during the celebrated mission to secure the STC
Lectionary from the ashrams of Ullidor the Techsmith. As I have remarked,
the Inquisition – indeed most august bodies of the Imperium – find dealings
with the Cult Mechanicus problematic at best. Its power is legendary and its
insularity notorious. The cult is a closed order which guards the secrets of
its technologies jealously. But Bure and Hapshant developed a beneficial
working relationship based on mutual esteem. On several occasions, Bure’s
specialist wisdom assisted my mentor in the prosecution of important cases,
and on several others, the favour was returned.
That is why, a century before, I entrusted an item of particular importance
to his expert custody.
THE CONTROL CHAMBER of the wheezing translithopede was a split-level
chapel where a raised command podium, like a giant brass pulpit,
overlooked two semi-circular rows of busy control stations. The riveted iron
walls were painted matt red and etched with the various aspects and runes
of the Machine God. The forward wall was shrouded in long drapes of red
velvet.
Six oil-streaked servitors worked at the chattering control stations, their
hands and faces plugged directly into the systems via thick, metal-sleeved
cables or striped flexes marked with purity seals and parchment labels.
Glass valves and dials flickered and glowed, and the air was heady with the
scent of oils and sacred unguents.
Two relatively human tech-adepts in orange robes were overseeing the
activity. One was linked directly into the vehicle’s mind-impulse unit
through a trio of neural plugs, and he murmured aloud the rites and
scriptures of the Adeptus. The other turned and bowed as we came onto the
podium.
He had a wire-mesh speaker where his mouth should have been. When he
spoke, it was in a pulse of binary machine code.
Bure responded in kind, and for a few moments they exchanged tight
bursts of condensed data. Then Bure floated over to a brass lectern built
into the podium’s rail and opened his robe. Two probing neural cables
extended from his chrome sternum like sucker-worms hunting for prey and
connected swiftly with the polished sockets on the lectern.
Now Bure was also conjoined with the translithopede’s mind-impulse
unit.
‘We make good speed,’ he told us. He twitched, and the velvet drapes at
the far end of the chamber drew aside automatically, revealing a large
holographic display. Secondary images overlaid the main one, showing
three-dimensional charts and power/speed graphics. The main image was
just a dark rushing blur laced with crackles of blue energy.
This was the view directly ahead of us, the rock disintegrating before the
awesome destructive force of the plasma cutting-screw. We were travelling
straight through solid rock.
‘Perhaps it’s time we discussed what’s going on here,’ I said.
‘We hunt,’ sad Bure.
‘You’ve been hunting for a long time, magos,’ said Aemos. ‘Eleven
weeks now. What are you hunting for?’
‘And why is Cinchare minehead derelict?’ I added.
Bure paused as he selected the correct electrograft memory. He was
almost lost in the euphoria of mind-impulse union.
‘Ninety-two days ago, as far as I am able to reason it, an independent
prospector called Farluke, working under license for Ortog Promethium,
returned from a long tour of assay rock side and presented his masters with
a unique discovery. They tried to keep it secret for a while, hoping, I
believe, to exploit it for their own ends. That error in judgment was costly.
By the time they realised their mistake, and shared their data with the
Adeptus, it was already too late.’
‘What had Farluke found?’ asked Aemos.
‘It is called the Lith. I have not seen it, but I have studied extracts
recovered from the bodies of tainted men.’
‘Recovered?’ breathed Medea, unnerved.
‘Posthumously. The Lith is a hyper-dense geode of approximately seven
hundred tonnes. It is, as I understand it, a perfect decahedron four metres in
diameter. Its mineral composition is exotic and inexplicable. And it is
alive.’
‘What? Magos! Alive?’
‘Sentient, at least. It is infused with the wretched filth of Chaos. How
long it has lain undiscovered in the depths of this world, I do not know.
Perhaps it has always been here, or perhaps it was hidden in pre-Imperial
times by unknown hands to keep it safe... or to dispose of it. Perhaps,
indeed, it is the reason Cinchare has broken from the order of its stellar
dance and drifted, rogue and wild, through the stars. I had hoped, initially,
to find it and recover it. Its composition alone promised a wealth of
precious knowledge. But now I hunt for it... simply to destroy it.’
‘It has corrupted this world, hasn’t it?’ I said.
‘Completely. As soon as it came in contact with men, it began to twist
their minds with its malign power. It subjugated them. The Ortog work
teams sent down to examine it were the first. What is, to all intents and
purposes, a cult sprang up spontaneously. Each initiate had a splinter of
rock shaved from the Lith buried beneath his skin in a simple, brutal ritual.’
‘We’ve seen the marks.’
‘Disorder spread through Cinchare minehead as the cult grew. The Lith
couldn’t be moved, but splinters were brought up and used to infect more
and more of the workforce. Once tainted, the workers began to disappear,
setting off on pilgrimages down into the mines to make worship to the Lith.
Many never made it. Most have simply vanished. I’ve tried to follow their
tracks, sometimes encountering hostile cult elements bent on protecting
their deity. But Farluke’s original data is unreliable. I cannot find the Lith’s
true location. I fear it is just a matter of time before the cult manages to
extend its reach beyond Cinchare. Or...’
‘Or?’
‘Or they will complete some arcane task instructed by the Lith and
awaken its power in full... or allow it to connect with its own kind.’
We considered this grim possibility for a moment. Aemos quietly pulled
up an entry on the screen of his data-slate, unclipped the device from his
wrist, and handed it to Bure.
‘Does this help?’ he asked.
Bure stared at the slate. His green eyebeams dilated into hard, bright
points.
‘How in the name of the Warpsmiths did you...’
‘What is it?’ I asked, stepped forward.
‘The location of the Lith,’ said Aemos proudly.
‘How did you get this?’ Bure cried, his vox undercut by excited binary
chatter.
‘The cult needs to know where it is. The reference was clearly marked in
the charts I downloaded from the security office. I didn’t realise its
significance until now.’
‘You just downloaded this?’ Bure said.
‘I believe they thought they had no reason to hide it. It wasn’t encrypted.’
Bure threw back his chrome skull and laughed, a screeching, mocking
cackle. ‘Eleven weeks! Eleven weeks I have scoured and searched and
fought my way through the bowels of this rock, hunting for clues, and the
answer was up there all the time! In plain sight!’
He turned to Aemos and laid a steel hand on the savant’s stooped
shoulder. ‘I have always admired your wisdom, Uber, and recognised why
Hapshant valued you so... but now I realise that great wisdom comes from
simplicity.’
‘It was luck, nothing more.’
‘It was bold simplicity, savant! A moment of direct, clear thought that
quite dwarfs my labours down here.’
‘You’re too kind...’ Aemos mumbled.
‘Kind? No, I am not kind,’ Bure’s eye-lights swelled and flashed. ‘I will
cut my way to the heart of the Lith, and then its spawn will see how unkind
my soul can be.’
TWO HOURS LATER, after Bure’s servitors had taken us to a sparely
furnished cabin and provided us with flavourless, odourless nutrient broth
and hard cakes of fibre bread, we were summoned back to the control
chamber.
Outside, a small war was going on.
I had already sensed we had decelerated from tunnelling speed by the
reduced throb of the impellers, and now I saw why. We had bored out of the
rock into a towering vault lit by spurting pools of magma and flaming
spouts of gas. On the chamber’s holographic screen, I could see distorted,
jarring images of the cavern outside. Silent laser fire was jabbing at us.
Bure was linked to the podium’s lectern.
‘We’ve found their nest,’ he said. ‘They resist.’
As I watched, two soot-stained prospector pods powered in towards us,
firing small arms from their open hatches.
Bure nodded to one of his tech-adepts, and the shriek of multi-laser blasts
rang through the hull. One pod exploded in a ball of light, the other tumbled
away, shredded and burning.
I realised there were men on the ground too: miners in armoured work-
suits scurrying forward and firing at the translithopede.
Bure increased magnification, and we saw that some of them carried
pallets of mining charges, hoping to get close enough to breach our hull.
‘Stalkers,’ Bure said. It was evidently an order. There was a clank and a
thud as hatches opened somewhere below us, and then new shapes began to
move into view on the screen.
They were combat servitors. Heavyweight and burnished silver, they
strode on powerful, backward-jointed legs, puffing black exhaust from their
upthrust smoke stacks. Cannons in their upper limbs jerked with pneumatic
recoil as they systematically targeted and cut down the cultists.
‘Stalker 453, left and target,’ Bure murmured. They were all slaved to his
direct control.
One of the stalkers retrained its weapons and gunned four more cultists
down. The charge-load they had been hefting exploded in a bright flash that
blacked out the display for a second. When the holo-image returned, the
stalker was already pacing on after new targets.
‘Stalker 130 and Stalker 252, fan right. Opposition in cover behind that
stalactite mass.’
‘Oh great Emperor,’ said Aemos suddenly. ‘Some of them are
unarmoured.’
It was true. A good many of the men assaulting us wore no shielding or
environment armour. Their clothes were charred to black rags and their
flesh was blistered and raw. Some force was keeping them active and
functioning in this great infernal depth where no living thing should have
been able to survive unprotected. Not the pressure, the extreme heat, not
even the toxic, corrosive atmosphere was stopping them. The taint of the
Lith had transmuted them into denizens of this underworld.
The wave of stalkers strode forward inexorably, and the translithopede
followed them slowly, its impelling lines of adamantium cilia dragging it
across the cavern rock. The multi-lasers fired again, destroying another
vehicle – a large ore transporter that had been attempting to crash itself into
our machine.
The mighty plasma screw churned again and ruptured apart a curtain of
massive dripstones. Drizzles of dust obscured our picture for a few seconds.
When it cleared, we saw the true horror, and realised the ultimate,
blasphemous fate of Cinchare Minehead’s population.
The blasphemy was huge, a writhing mound of baked, raw flesh and
cooking bone. One by one, the tainted workers of Cinchare, even Bure’s
corrupted brethren from the Adeptus, had come down here to willingly
contribute their organic matter to this mass.
As the translithopede came into view, it rose up, forming a great, rearing
worm of red ooze and blackened meat fifty metres high. A ghastly mouth,
big enough to swallow a prospecting pod, gaped wide in its cresting head,
and it belched a vast ball of flaming gases at us.
The translithopede shook, warning hooters sounded, and the picture was
lost. One control station below exploded, throwing its servitor to the deck.
Smoke billowed through the chamber.
‘Such power,’ Bure marvelled, emotionless. The whole machine lurched
again, more violently, and we stumbled, despite the internal gravity systems
and inertial dampers.
The screen image restored, jumping, for a brief moment, enough to see
that the blasphemy seemed to be coiling itself around us. The hull creaked
and protested. Minor explosions rang out from lower decks. Plated seams
bulged and several rivets flew out like bullets.
‘Bure!’
‘I will break it! I will cast it out!’
‘Bure! In the name of the Emperor!’
He wasn’t listening. All his efforts were focussed on the mind-impulse
link driving the translithopede, on the orchestration of his stalkers as they
rallied to counter-attack the monstrosity. His confidence in the supremacy
of the Machine over all things was blinding him to the very real possibility
that the formidable Cult Mechanicus had just met its match.
I turned to Medea and Aemos.
‘Come on!’ I cried.
WE WERE HALFWAY down the translithopede’s main companionway,
heading towards the rear of the great machine, when a still more violent
impact shook it. Without warning, the inertial dampers failed and we
tumbled as the burrower was rolled onto its side. The glass mantles of the
gas lights smashed, and weak flame sputtered and danced along the walls.
There was a further series of terrific impacts.
We got to our feet, now forced to use the curving wall as a floor. The
pulsing shriek of the multi-lasers was by then a constant noise outside.
Red warning lights were flashing in the arched dock-bay. Our pod had
been torn from its cradle by the latest impact and lay crumpled on its side,
reclining against part of the roof arching. But the oxide-red pod was still
safely locked in place.
Medea and I jumped down from the dock’s inner hatch onto the ceiling,
but Aemos called after us.
‘I can’t make that jump,’ he protested. I knew he was right.
‘Then seal the hatch and get back to help Bure!’
‘The Emperor protect you both!’ he shouted as the hatch closed.
Power cables that had once lain on the deck now dangled like ropes.
Grabbing one each, we began to rappel up towards the pod in its cradle. We
were halfway there when the world seemed to shudder again and the
translithopede righted itself violently. Medea and I went sprawling, loose
debris skittering all around us. I had barely enough time to dive and heave
Medea aside before our own wrecked pod came crunching back down the
wall, slamming sideways onto the floor.
Another lurch and the deck tipped the other way, out of true by about
twenty degrees. The unanchored pod began sliding across the deck towards
us.
‘Get in!’ Medea yelled. ‘Get in!’ She had the side hatch of the red pod
open and dragged me halfway inside. A moment later, and the
translithopede rocked back thirty degrees in the other direction.
The loose pod immediately squealed back across the deck and crashed
into the wall bulkheads. I was dangling by my hands from the open hatch.
‘Crap! Get in! Get the hell in!’ Medea wailed, fighting to hold on to me. I
grunted and swung my legs up so that my toe caps caught the door sill.
With a further effort, I managed to pull myself up, and Medea slammed the
hatch.
There was still more shaking and rocking. We clambered in to the seats
of the pilot station in the low cockpit, and strapped on the harnesses. Medea
was keying the pod’s drive ignition when the translithopede inverted again
and left us hanging in our seats by the safety straps. The pod was now
locked in its cradle on the roof.
‘This’ll be fun,’ Medea laughed aggressively. She had sent a remote
command to open the dock-bay’s shutter doors. Then she powered the pod’s
engines to full thrust and disengaged the cradle lock.
For a dizzying second, we dropped, upside down, like a rock. Then she
hit the thrusters and looped us. We missed the dock-bay roof by a hands-
breadth and flew out through the opening shutters even as the entire
translithopede rolled over again.
THE BLASPHEMY HAD wrapped itself around Bure’s great subterranean
burrower with constricting coils. It thrashed and shook the machine, and I
could clearly see the armoured hull beginning to buckle and crumple. There
were smoking sockets where some of the multi-laser batteries had been
ripped away. The stalkers were converging on the wrestling giants, strafing
the Chaos worm with furious barrages. The remains of several lay crushed
where the translithopede had rolled on them.
Medea banked us around, trying to speed-familiarise herself with the
control layout.
‘What do we do? I take it you’ve got a plan?’
I shook my head. ‘I’m working on it.’ Bure’s pod was unarmed – I know
this because I checked feverishly the moment we were airborne – and there
was nothing that might be turned into an offensive weapon apart from a
mining laser under the chin of the cockpit. A mining laser with fierce
cutting power and a range of about five metres.
‘Take us deeper into the cavern,’ I said, consulting the display on the
pod’s geologicae auspex.
‘Away from the fight?’
‘We can’t engage that thing... so we find the Lith instead. And that return
has got to be it.’
There was a pulsing cursor on the screen: big, unmistakable.
Cultists on the cave floor blasted at us as we zipped over them and
headed off down the long, volcanic cavern. Spumes of pyroclastic wrath
detonated up from the lava lakes and threatened to envelop us.
Then we saw the Lith.
It had been buried in a plug of obsidian jutting from the cavern wall, but
serious excavation work had been done to reveal it.
Heavy mining pods and anti-grav drill platforms sat on the ash slopes
below it, and the ground was covered in fragments of obsidian.
It was, as Bure had described, a perfect decahedron four metres across,
dark green and glassy like water-ice. It glowed with an inner light. Even
from a distance, it felt malevolent. I sensed an unnerving tickling at the
edge of my psychic range. Medea looked sick.
‘I don’t want to get any closer,’ she said suddenly.
‘We have to!’
‘And do what?’
I wondered if we could cut it with the mining laser. I wondered indeed if
that would do any good. I doubted we would make much of dent in it even
if we power-dived the pod at it.
Yet, the cultists had shaved splinters from it to promulgate their evil. It
was vulnerable... unless it had somehow allowed the splinters to be
removed.
We certainly couldn’t move it.
I could feel it now, whispering in my head. There were no words, just a
murmur that chilled my spine. Insidious, slow... slow like eons of
geological time, slow like a glacier or a tectonic plate. It spoke softly and
without haste, gently unfolding its seductive message. It had no need to
rush. It had all the time in the galaxy...
The pod yawed wildly. I started and looked around. Medea had lost
partial control because she had turned to be violently sick over the side of
her seat. Her skin was blanched and she was panting and sweating.
‘I... I can’t...’ she gasped. ‘Don’t make me go any closer...’
She had reached her limits. I leaned over and put my hand against the
side of her head. ‘Sleep,’ I said softly, using the will.
She sank into merciful unconsciousness.
I took the controls.
I was no flier like Medea Betancore, and for a moment, I thought I was
going to dive us nose-first into the lake of bubbling magma as I fumbled
with the actuators.
But Medea’s late father had trained me well enough. I swooped low over
the pool of molten rock, creating a shockwave vortex in the brimstone, and
banked around a massive anthragate column that rose up into the jagged
roof. There was just a last wide lake of fire between me and the ash shore
where the Lith was exposed.
It was whispering again, but I shook it off. I had trained my mind hard to
resist the ministrations of Chaos and its psychic wiles. This was how it
turned weak minds. This was how it had polluted and tainted the population
of Cinchare Minehead. The whispering... the formless, shapeless words of
power that drew mankind into the embrace of the warp...
An idea struck me. I like to think it was an idea born out of the same pure
simplicity that Bure had celebrated in Aemos. A perfect, simple possibility.
I shrugged from my mind my fears for the life of Aemos and the magos.
The blasphemy might already have torn the translithopede apart in the
cavern far behind me. If they were not beyond hope, then this was the best I
could do for them.
Risking a free hand, I reached sideways and activated the pod’s vox-
ponder, setting it to record. Then, concentrating on my steering once more, I
began to speak, clearly and loudly, dredging words up from my memory.
Long ago, on my birth planet, DeKere’s World, as a child, standing in the
long hall of the primary scholam with the other pupils, reciting together...
A collision warning blared, and I veered to the left in time to glimpse a
prospecting pod that filled my cockpit windows for a moment before racing
past.
Two bright yellow cursors had appeared on my auspex display. The
beacon locators of prospecting pods, like the ones that had chased us into
the mine system.
The one that had tried to collide with me was turning wide over the lava
lake. The other was coming in on an intercept course. I swung round to face
it and then gulled away at the last minute. The pass was close, close enough
to see the Ortog Promethium symbols on its flank. Close enough to see
Enforcer Kaleil’s face through the cockpit ports.
The first pod, an Imperial Allied symbol just visible through the heat-
flaked paint, came in and blocked my route to the shore and the Lith. Its
driver, unidentifiable, had smashed the window lights out and was firing a
lascarbine out from the cockpit. Despite our comparative speeds, I felt
several shots land home, banging into the pod’s fuselage. I steered away,
trying desperately not to break my recitation as I concentrated on the air
duel.
I began to chant the words like a mantra.
As I turned from the Imperial Allied pod, I met Kaleil’s vessel head on. I
rolled hard to evade, but still we clipped and the whole pod shook.
Warning lights lit up across the control console. I had thruster damage
and reduced manoeuvring ability. The lava lake flashed up to consume me
but I climbed hard, away from the ash beach.
All the while, my recitation continued.
The Imperial Allied pod was on my tail, streaking the air with las-shots.
We whipped hard around the anthragate pillar, but I couldn’t shake him. I
tried to think what Medea would do. What Midas would have done. For a
moment, my words faltered as I planned and executed my frantic response.
The pod was right behind me. I braked hard, and managed to spin the
anti-grav machine in place using the attitude jets, dropping my nose as if
curtseying to my attacker. And I ignited my mining laser.
The Imperial Allied pod was far too close to my rear to effect a turn or a
brake. I think he was trying for a collision, but I was just too high for him.
He ran in under my hull at full thrust, so close he tore the lighting array and
the auspex antennae off the underside of my pod.
He also ran straight through the incandescent spear of my mining laser. It
sliced the Imperial Allied pod lengthways and sent the disintegrating halves
spinning away into the white hot magma below.
My pod was half crippled now from the pair of impacts. I continued my
recitation, hoping the brief lapse wouldn’t matter.
With its antennae gone, the auspex was blind, but I could see Kaleil
anyway. He was gunning across the lake straight for me.
I hovered in place. There was a time for action and, as I had already
gambled, a time for words. I switched off the vox-ponder and keyed the
open channel.
‘Kaleil?’
‘Horn!’
‘Not Horn... Inquisitor Eisenhorn.’
Silence. He was two hundred metres and closing at a speed that would
wipe us both out.
I pressed the vox-mic close to my mouth and used every shred of my
will.
‘Don’t,’ I said.
The Ortog Promethium pod veered and then dived straight down into the
lava lake. A halo of fire broke up from the slow, undulating splash it made
in the liquid rock.
I LIMPED MY pod over to the ash beach and set down about twenty metres
short of the Lith. Medea moaned in her sleep. I dreaded the dreams that
might be boiling through her subconscious.
‘Get out of my head!’ I snarled aloud at the Lith’s persistent whispering.
It took me a moment to rewind the vox-ponder recording and set it to a
continuous loop. Then I diverted its signal into the echo-sounding sonar
system that the pod used to supplement its auspex in assay and location
work. I twiddled the dials until the powerful sonar was aimed directly at the
malevolent decahedron.
Conveyed in fierce ultra-sonic pulses, my recording blasted the Lith. The
Emperor’s Prayer of Abrogation Against the Warp, learned by rote by every
good schoolchild of the Imperium. An innocent blessing against the
darkness, a banishment of Chaos. I doubted it had ever been used so
actively. I doubted my scholam tutors had ever conceived of such a use for
that simple, sing-song declaration.
‘Words,’ I murmured. ‘Your corrupt whispers against my words of
power. How do you like that?’
I pushed the sonar gain to maximum. In terms of sonics alone, the pulses
would have stunned a man to unconsciousness and snapped his bones.
For a good minute or more, I feared it was having no effect.
Then the whispering ceased. It became a subsonic moaning of rage and
anguish, and finally agony.
The Lith’s surface became discoloured, as if mottled by mould. It
shuddered, cracking the obsidian around it.
Then its inner luminescence sputtered and went out, and it became
indistinguishable from the black volcanic glass that surrounded it.
WHEN THE LITH died, so did its servants, and so did the blasphemy.
Checking that Medea was now just sleeping soundly, I nursed the damaged
pod back down the cavern in time to see the last stringy remnants of the
foul worm combusting and sliding off the translithopede’s buckled hull. The
air was thick with dirty cinders and the smoke of burning fat.
The burning corpses of cultists littered the chamber floor. Motionless
stalkers stood in their midst, cycling on pause, waiting for the next
command.
BROKEN AND TWISTED, the great burrower was at least intact. When I
brought the pod into the dock-bay, Bure’s own tech-adepts themselves
emerged to take care of Medea’s unconscious body.
The companionway floor was raked over at an angle. Bure’s engineer
priests were still trying to repair the inertial dampers.
Acrid smoke filled the air, unpleasantly scented by the fat-fires outside.
Aemos met me in the doorway of the control chamber and hugged me
briefly in a rare display of affection. Bure had shed his orange robe. A
sinister, stark, inhuman silhouette, he watched our very human exchange
from the edge of the podium, backlit by fires raging in the workstations
below.
‘We’re fine now, old friend,’ I said to Aemos.
He broke the embrace, as if guilty. ‘You did well, Gregor. Marvellously!
I... I didn’t mean any disrespect...’
It was at times like that I wished I could still smile. I am too used to my
face being the impassive mask Gorgone Locke gave me.
Using my will gently, so he might understand the truth of my words, I
said, ‘No disrespect taken, old friend.’
Aemos smiled sheepishly and turned away.
His suspensors hissing, Bure glided over to me. To my surprise, he
hugged me too. It was brief and clumsy, his servo arms conveying no
warmth. I felt terrible sorrow for him then. His human core had been moved
by the events and he had seen and copied Aemos’s impromptu display of
affection. Just then, I believe, he passionately wanted to be human again.
Just for a moment. But his vicing arms had no more emotion in them than
the tight handshake with which he had first greeted me.
He swung away, his arms to his sides. His green eye-lights flicked back
and forth over the repair teams as they worked to contain the damage.
‘I have never said,’ he began, his voxed voice toneless and cold, though
it tried to be neither of those things. ‘Hapshant. He thought the world of
you, Eisenhorn. He told me once that he believed you would eclipse his
career with your own. I think he was right.’
‘Thank you, magos.’
He turned around to look at me. His eye were tiny spots of emerald fire.
‘You never did say what brought you here.’
‘Recent matters somewhat overtook us, magos.’
‘Yes. But still, you never did say...’
‘I have to explain the... circumstances that have changed in my life,
magos. I will explain them carefully, in the hope that you will understand
and not think badly of me. But first... I gave you something to safeguard
and study, a century ago. I’d like to see it again.’
IT WAS IRONIC, as if some karmic balance was at work. Of course, I didn’t
believe in such things. Bure had burrowed and tunnelled his way fruitlessly
through the heart of Cinchare for eleven weeks, only to have Aemos
casually present him with the Lith’s location. And we had gone deep into
the mines to find Bure only to learn that what I had come to Cinchare for
had been safely locked away in the annex of the Adeptus Mechanicus all
along, had I but looked for it.
IT TOOK THIRTY hours for the ailing translithopede to make its way back
to the surface. Once we’d broken through the blue gypnate crust at the
Imperial Allied mineworks, I sent Aemos and Medea back to the cutter to
check in with Bequin and the others, still waiting aboard the Essene at high
orbit. I hoped they hadn’t done anything foolish in my absence.
BURE TOOK ME to the annex. His encoded touch brought the sanctum to
life, and lit long hallways to either side of the Mechanicus chapel. He led
me down one of these, the illumination plates still flickering as they
warmed up after such a prolonged period of disuse.
The magos linked his thoracic neural cables to a wall socket and
disengaged a lock. A heavy, armoured door slid open. Then another, inside
the first, then a third, a sturdy iris valve that withdrew segmentally into the
wall frame with a noise like swords sheathing.
‘This is what you want,’ said Bure. ‘He has been most informative, over
the years.’
‘I’ll review your reports later, magos,’ I said. ‘Leave me with him now.’
Bure withdrew.
I stepped through the iris valve and down three grilled steps into the cell,
feeling the nauseating static prickle of the psychic dampening fields. Every
surface was dusted with ice-crystals. There was a crackle of synaptic
energy.
‘Hello, Eisenhorn,’ said a hollow, vox-projected voice. It came from a
casket that squatted on a basalt block in the centre of the room. Both casket
and stone were caked in ice. Tiny lights darted and blinked inside the
casket’s open lid.
I prepared myself. Then I replied.
‘Pontius Glaw. We meet again.’
TWENTY
Interview with the Damned.
Bure, warsmith.
Orbul Infanta.
‘LET ME MAKE sure I understand you, Eisenhorn,’ said the disembodied
voice of Pontius Glaw, slowly and contemptuously. ‘You think I’m going to
help you?’
I cleared my throat. ‘Yes.’
Pontius laughed. Synapse leads connected to the gold circuits of his
engram sphere flashed in series. ‘I didn’t think a man of such studied
dullness and sobriety as you would have the ability to surprise me,
Eisenhorn. My mistake.’
‘You will help me,’ I said, quietly but emphatically.
I brushed frost from the grilled steps and sat down facing his casket. It
was claw-footed, rectangular, compact and filled with complex technology
designed for one purpose: the support and operation of the engram sphere, a
rough-cut nugget the size of a clenched fist in which resided the intellect –
and perhaps the soul – of one of the most notorious heretics in the
Imperium.
Pontius Glaw, dead in body for nigh on three hundred years, had been in
his physical life one of the more unwholesome products of the powerful
Glaw dynasty. That family line, part of the high nobility of Gudrun, had
whelped many heretics in its time, the last of whom had been instrumental
in the affair of the Necroteuch. Supported by the considerable efforts of
Imperial Navy Security, I had all but crushed their poisonous lineage, and in
the process had captured the engram sphere of Pontius Glaw.
His family and their minions had attempted to sacrifice thousands of
innocents in order to restore him to physicality. That, too, I had denied.
Once the affair had ended, I had been left with this casket full of heretical
spite. In terms of technology alone, it was a wonder, and there was no
telling what secrets the Pontius might have in it. So instead of destroying it,
I had passed it into the safekeeping of Magos Geard Bure. Bure, I knew,
would have the time and skill enough to unlock its technical marvels at
least. And he was trustworthy.
But from time to time in that past hundred years, I had questioned the
validity of that decision. In all honesty, I should have surrendered the
Pontius to the Ordo Hereticus for examination and disposal. The fact that I
hadn’t sometimes played on my conscience, for it suggested deceit and
unwholesome subterfuge on my part. In the light of events in the past year, I
found myself fighting back the notion that perhaps my accusers were right.
Had it been the act of an unsound man to secret away such a radical entity?
Aemos had consoled my spirits, reminding me that the casket utilised
mind-impulse technology undoubtedly stolen from the Cult Mechanicus.
There was, he said, no question that such a device should be in the custody
of the Adeptus priesthood.
‘Go on then,’ Pontius said. ‘Make your case. Why would I help you?’
‘I require specialist information that I’m certain you have. Certain lore.’
‘You are an inquisitor, Eisenhorn. All the resources of the Imperium are
at your disposal. Am I to understand that, well, that your scope has become
somewhat limited?’
I was damned if I was going to tell this monster of the straits I was in.
And even though he was right in a way, there was no Imperial archive I
knew of that could answer my questions.
‘What I need might be regarded as... proscribed knowledge.’
‘Ahhhhh...’
‘What? “Ah” what?’
Even without features or body language to read, Pontius seemed
insufferably pleased with himself. ‘So you’ve finally reached that place.
How wonderful.’
‘What place?’ I felt uncomfortable. I had been planning this interview for
months, and now control was slipping entirely to Glaw.
‘The place where you cross the line.’
‘I hav—’
‘All inquisitors cross the line eventually.’
‘I tell y—’
‘All of them. It’s an occupational hazard.’
‘Listen to me, you worthless—’
‘Methinks Inquisitor Eisenhorn protests too much. The line, Gregor. The
line! The line between order and chaos, between right and wrong, between
mankind and man-unkind. I know it, because I’ve crossed it. Willingly, of
course. Gladly. Skipping and dancing and delighting. For the likes of you, it
is a more painful process.’
I rose. ‘I don’t think this conversation is going anywhere, Glaw. I’m
leaving.’
‘So soon?’
‘Perhaps I’ll be back in another century or two.’
‘It was on Quenthus Eight, in the spring of 019.M41.’
I paused at the cell hatchway. ‘What was?’
‘The moment I crossed the line. Would you like to hear about it?’
I was rattled, but I returned to my seat on the steps. I knew what he was
doing. Imprisoned in his casket without touch or smell or taste, without any
sensory stimulation, Pontius Glaw craved company and conversation. I had
learned that much during my long interrogations of him aboard the Essene
ten decades before during the voyage to the remote system KCX-1288.
Now he was simply feeding me morsels to make me stay and talk to him.
However, in a hundred years of captivity he had never come close to
revealing such intimate details of his personal history.
‘019.M41. A busy year. The buttress worlds of the far eastern rim were
resisting a Holy Waaagh by the greenskins, and two of the High Lords of
Terra had been assassinated in as many months by disaffected Imperial
families. There was talk of civil war. The sub-sector’s trader markets had
crashed. Trade was bad. What a year. Saint Drache was martyred on
Korynth. Billions starved in the Beznos famine.’
‘I have access to history texts, Pontius,’ I said dryly
‘I was on Quenthus VIII, buying fighters for my pit-games. They’re a
good breed, the Quenthi, long in the hams and quite belligerent. I was,
perhaps, twenty-five. I forget exactly. I was in my prime, beautiful.’
There was a long silence while he considered this reflection. Light-sparks
pulsed along his wires.
‘One of the pit-marshals at the amphitheatre I was visiting advised me to
see a fighter who had been bought in from the very edges of the Ultima
Segmentum. A great, tanned fellow from a feral world called Borea. His
name was Aaa, which meant, in his tongue, “sword-cuts-meat-for-women-
prizes”. Isn’t that lovely? If I had ever sired a son, a human one, I mean, I
would have called him Aaa. Aaa Glaw. Quite a ring to it, eh?’
‘I’m still on the verge of leaving, Glaw.’
The voice from the casket chuckled. ‘This Aaa was a piece of work. His
teeth were filed into points and his fingertips had been bound and treated
with traditional unguents since his birth so that they had grown into claws.
Claws, Eisenhorn! Fused, calcified hooks of keratin and callouses. I once
saw him rip through chainmail with them. Anyway, he was a true find.
They kept him shackled permanently. The pit-marshal told me that he’d
torn a fellow prisoner’s arm off during transit, and scalped a careless
stadium guard. With his teeth.’
‘Charming.’
‘I bought him, of course. I think he liked me. He had no real language,
naturally, and his table manners! He slept in his own soil and rutted like a
canine.’
‘No wonder he liked you.’
The frost crackled around the casket. ‘Cruel boy. I am a cultured man.
Ha. I was a cultured man. Now I am an erudite and dangerous box. But
don’t forget my learning and upbringing, Eisenhorn. You’d be amazed how
easy it is for a well-raised and schooled son of the Imperium to slide across
that line I mentioned.’
‘Go on. I’m sure you had a point to make.’
‘Aaa served me well. I won several fortunes on his pit-fights. I won’t
pretend we ever became friends... one doesn’t become friends with a
favourite carnodon now, does one? And one certainly never makes friends
with a commodity. But we built an understanding over the years. I would
visit him in his cell, unguarded, and he never touched me. He would halt
out old myths of his home world, Borea. Vicious tales of barbary and
murder. But I’m getting ahead of myself. The moment, the moment was
there on Quenthus, in the amphitheatre, under the spring sun. The pit-
marshal showed me Aaa, and tempted me to purchase him. Aaa looked at
me, and I think he saw a kindred soul... which is probably why we bonded
once he was mine. In his simple, broken speech, he implored me to buy
him, telling me graphically what sport I would have of him. And to seal the
deal, he offered me his tore.’
‘His tore?’
‘That’s right. The slaves were allowed to keep certain familiar items
provided they weren’t potential weapons. Aaa wore a golden tore around
his neck, the mark of his tribe. It was the most valuable thing he possessed.
Actually, it was the only thing he possessed. But no matter... he offered it to
me in return for me becoming his master. I took it, and, as I said, I bought
him.’
‘And that was the line?’ I sat back, unimpressed.
‘Wait, wait... later, later that same day, I examined the tore. It was inlaid
with astonishing technology. Borea might have been a beast-world by then,
but millennia back, it had clearly been an advanced outpost of mankind. It
had fallen into a feral dark age because Chaos had touched it, and that tore
was a relic of the decline. Its forbidden, forgotten technology focussed the
stuff of the Darkness into the wearer’s mind. No wonder Borea, where
every adult male wore one, was a savage waste. I was intrigued. I put the
tore on.’
‘You put it on?’
‘I was young and reckless, what can I say? I put it on. Within a few
hours, the tendrils of the warp had suffused my receptive mind. And do you
know what?’
‘What?’
‘It was wonderful! Liberating! I was alive to the real universe at last! I
had crossed the line, and it was bliss. Suddenly I saw everything as it
actually was, not as the Ministorum and the rot-hearted Emperor wanted to
see it. Engulfing eternity! The fragility of the human race! The glories of
the warp! The fleeting treasure of flesh! The incomparable sweetness of
death! All of it!’
‘And you ceased to be Pontius Glaw, the seventh son of a respectable
Imperial House, and became Pontius Glaw, the sadistic idolator and
abomination?’
‘A boy’s got to have a hobby’
‘Thank you for sharing this with me, Pontius. It has been revealing.’
‘I’m just getting started.’
‘Goodbye.’
‘Eisenhorn! Eisenhorn, wait! Please! I—’
The cell hatches clanged shut after me.
I WAITED TWO days before I returned to see him. He was sullen and
moody this time.
I entered the cell and set down the tray I was carrying.
‘Don’t expect me to talk to you,’ he said.
‘Why?’
‘I opened my soul to you the other day and you... walked out.’
‘I’m back now.’
‘Yes, you are. Closer to that line yet?’
‘You tell me,’ I leaned over and poured myself a large glass of amasec
from the decanter on the tray. I rocked the glass a few times and then took a
deep sip.
‘Amasec.’
‘Yes.’
‘Vintage?’
‘Fifty year old Gathalamor vintage, aged in burwood barrels.’
‘Is it... good?’
‘No.’
‘No?’
‘It is perfect.’
The casket sighed.
‘You were saying. About that line?’ I asked.
‘I... I was saying I was most annoyed with you,’ Pontius returned,
stubbornly.
‘Oh,’ I casually slid a lho-stick from the paste-board tub I had
backhanded from Tasaera Ungish’s stateroom. I lit it and took a deep drag,
exhaling the smoke towards the infernal casket. Nayl had injected me with
powerful anti-intoxicants and counter-opiate drugs just half an hour earlier,
but I sat back and openly seemed to relish the smoke.
‘Is that a lho-stick?’
‘Yes, Pontius.’
‘Hmmm...’
‘You were saying?’
‘Is it good?’
‘You were saying?’
‘I... I’ve told you of my slip. My crossing of the line. What else do you
want of me?’
‘The rest. You think I’ve crossed the line too, don’t you?’
‘Yes. It’s in your bearing. You seem like a man who has understood the
wider significance of the warp.’
‘Why is that?’
‘I told you it happens to all inquisitors sooner or later. I can imagine you
as a young man, stiff and puritanical, in the scholam. It must have seemed
so simple to you back then. The light and the dark.’
‘Not so obvious these days.’
‘Of course not. Because the warp is in everything. It is there even in the
most ordered things you do. Life would be brittle and flavourless without
it.’
‘Like your life is now?’ I suggested, and took another sip.
‘Damn you!’
‘According to you, I’m already damned.’
‘Everyone is damned. Mankind is damned. The whole human species.
Chaos and death are the only real truths of reality. To believe otherwise is
ignorance. And the Inquisition... so proud and dutiful and full of its own
importance, so certain that it is fighting against Chaos... is the most ignorant
thing of all. Your daily work brings you closer and closer to the warp,
increases your understanding of orderless powers. Gradually, without
noticing it, even the most puritanical and rod-stiff inquisitor becomes
seduced.’
‘I don’t agree.’
Pontius’s mood seemed to have brightened now we were engaged in
debate again. ‘The first step is the knowledge. An inquisitor must
understand the basic traits of Chaos in order to fight it. In a few years, he
knows more about the warp than most untutored cultists. Then the second
step: the moment he breaks the rules and allows some aspect of Chaos to
survive or remain so that he can study it and learn from it. I wouldn’t even
bother trying to deny that one, Eisenhorn. I’m right here, aren’t I?’
‘You are. But understanding is essential. Even a puritan will tell you that!
Without it, the Inquisition’s struggle is hopeless.’
‘Don’t get me started on that,’ he chuckled. Then paused. ‘Describe the
taste of that amasec in your mouth. The quality, the scent.’
‘Why?’
‘It is three hundred years since I have tasted anything. Smelt anything.
Touched anything.’
I had feared my gambit with the amasec and the opiate too obvious, but it
had drawn him in. ‘It feels like oil on my tongue, soft, body-heat. The
aroma precedes the taste, like peat and pepper, spiced. The taste is a burn in
the throat that lights a fire behind my heart.’
The casket made a long, mournful sound of tantalised regret.
‘The third step?’ I prompted.
‘The third step... the third step is the line itself. When the inquisitor
becomes a radical. When he chooses to use Chaos against Chaos. When he
employs the agencies of the warp. When he asks the heretical for help.’
‘I see.’
‘I’m sure you do. So... are you going to ask me to help you?’
‘Yes. Will you give me that help?’
‘It depends,’ the casket murmured. ‘What’s in it for me?’
I stubbed out the lho-stick. ‘Given what you’ve just said, I assume your
reward would be the satisfaction of seeing me cross that line and damn
myself.’
‘Ha ha! Very clever! I’m enjoying that part already. What else?’
I turned the glass in my hand, swilling the amber spirit around. ‘Magos
Bure is a talented man. A master of machinery. Though I would never
release you from imprisonment, I could perhaps ask him for a favour.’
‘A favour?’ Pontius echoed with trembling anticipation.
‘A body for you. A servitor chassis. The ability to walk, reach, hold, see.
Perhaps even the finessing extras of sense actuators: rudimentary touch,
smell, taste. That would be child’s play for him.’
‘Gods of the warp!’ he whispered.
‘Well?’
‘Ask. Ask me. Ask me, Eisenhorn.’
‘Let us talk for a while... on the subject of daemonhosts.’
‘DO YOU KNOW what you’re doing?’ Fischig said to me.
‘Of course,’ I said. We had taken over the security office in Cinchare
Minehead as our base. Bequin and Aemos had set the place straight and got
it running properly, and Medea, Inshabel, Nayl and Fischig patrolled the
area regularly. Bure had provided servitor-stalkers as additional guards, and
a vox-uplink had been established with the orbiting Essene to forewarn us
of any arriving space traffic.
It was late one afternoon in the third week of our visit to the mining rock.
I had just returned from my daily visit to Glaw’s cell in the Mechanicus
annex and I stood with Fischig by the windows of the office, looking down
into the plaza.
‘Really sure?’ he pressed.
‘I seem to remember him asking us the same thing when we sprang him
from the Carnificina,’ said Bequin, coming over to join us. ‘Thanks to
Osma and his ridiculous witch-hunt, we’ve been forced into a corner. If we
can come through this successfully, we will redeem ourselves.’
Fischig snorted. ‘I just don’t like it. Not dealing with that butcher. Not
promising him anything. I feel like we’ve crossed the line—’
‘What?’ I asked sharply. I had told them only the very sparest details of
my conversations.
‘I said I felt like we’d crossed the line. What’s the matter?’
I shook my head. ‘Nothing. How are the rest of the preparations going?’
I sensed Fischig wanted to have it out, but it was really too late for that. I
deflected him with the subject change.
‘Your magos friend is working. Nayl took him the blade yesterday and
showed him your notes and diagrams,’ he said.
‘The communiqués are all written, encrypted and sealed, ready to be
sent,’ said Bequin. ‘Just give the word, and Ungish will transmit them. And
I have the declaration here.’ She handed me a data-slate.
It was a carta extremis formally declaring Quixos Heretic and Extremis
Diabolus, naming his crimes and given in my authority. It was dated the
twentieth day of the tenth month, 340.M41. There was no location of issue,
but Aemos had made certain all the other particulars were phrased precisely
according to High Imperial Law and the statutes of the Inquisition.
‘Good. We’ll send that in a few days,’ I knew that the moment the carta
was published, my agenda would be known. The scheme I was embarking
on might take years to complete, and all that time I would be hunted. I
really didn’t want to stir things up so soon.
‘How much longer will we be here?’ Bequin asked.
‘I don’t know. Another week? A month? Longer? It depends on how
forthcoming Glaw decides to be.’
‘But you’ve got things from him already?’ asked Fischig.
‘Yes,’ Not too much, I hoped.
I WALKED THROUGH the empty streets of the minehead for an hour or two
that evening to clear my mind. I knew damn well that I was choosing a
dangerous path. I had to remain focussed or I risked losing control.
Once I’d got the upper hand with Glaw, I’d been playing with him during
those early conversations. His talk of the line, his three-step description of
the corruption that awaited an imprudent inquisitor... that was nothing new
to me. I had indulged him so that he might feel superior and smug. Any
inquisitor worth the rosette knew the perils and temptations that surrounded
him.
But it didn’t stop his words from cutting me. Every puritanical
Commodus Voke was a potential Quixos. When Glaw said that the line was
often crossed without it being recognised, he was right. I’d met enough
radicals to know that.
I had always, always prided myself on my puritanical stance, moderate
and Amalathian though it might be. I deplored the radical heresies. That’s
why I wanted Quixos.
But I worried still. I considered what I was doing to be risky, of course,
but also pragmatic given my difficult situation. To destroy Quixos, I had to
get past his daemonhosts, and that required power, knowledge and
expertise. And I could no longer turn to the Holy Inquisition for support.
But had I crossed the line? Was I becoming guilty of sins that could so
easily escalate into radical abomination? Was I so obsessed with bringing
Quixos to justice that I was abandoning my own principles?
I was sure I was not. I knew what I was doing, and I was taking every
precaution I could to manage the more dangerous elements I was
employing. I was pure and true, even now.
And if I wasn’t, how could I tell?
I CLIMBED AN observation mast that rose above the mine settlement and
lingered for a while in the caged glass blister at the top, looking out across
the town’s skyline to the ragged blue landscape of Cinchare, and the gliding
stars beyond it. Shoals of meteors burned bright lines down the sky.
There was a noise on the stairs behind me. It was Nayl.
He put away his sidearm. ‘It’s you,’ he said, joining me in the blister. ‘I
was patrolling and I saw the tower door open. Everything all right?’
I nodded. ‘You fight dirty sometimes, don’t you, Harlon?’
He looked at me quizzically and scratched his shaved scalp. ‘Not sure I
know what you mean, boss,’ he said.
‘All those years, bounty hunting... and I’ve seen you fight, remember?
Sometimes you have to break the rules to win.’
‘I suppose so. When all’s said and done, you use whatever works. I’m not
proud of some of my more... ruthless moments. But they’re necessary. I’ve
always been of the opinion that fairplay is overrated. The bastard trying to
skin you won’t be playing fair, that’s for sure. You do what you have to do.’
‘The end justifies the means?’
He raised his eyebrows and laughed. ‘Now that’s different. That kind of
thinking gets a man into trouble. There are some means that no end will
ever justify. But fighting dirty, occasionally, is no bad thing. Neither’s
breaking the rules. Provided you remember one thing.’
‘Which is?’
‘You have to understand the rules in the first place if you’re going to
break them.’
APART FROM MY daily visits to Glaw in the annex, I also spent time with
Bure. He was labouring in his workshops, assisted by servitors and his tech-
adepts. He had thrown himself totally into the tasks I had set him. Though
he never said, I think he saw it as returning with interest my efforts in the
battle with the Lith.
He had also listened without alarm when Aemos and I had related the
history of the recent past. It felt like a confession. I explained the carta out
against me, my rogue status. He had accepted my innocence without
question. As he put it, ‘Hapshant wouldn’t have raised a radical. It’s the rest
of the galaxy that’s wrong.’
That was good enough for him. I was quietly moved.
One day in the sixth week of our increasingly prolonged stay, he called
me to his workshop.
It lay beneath the main chapel of the annex and was two storeys deep, a
veritable smithy alive with engineering machines and apparatus the
purposes of which baffled me. Steam-presses hammered and banged, and
screw-guns wailed. Quite apart from my own projects, there was much
work to do repairing the annex and the translithopede. I walked down
through the swathes of steam and found Bure supervising two servitors who
were machining symbols into a two-metre long pole of composite steel.
‘Eisenhorn,’ he said, raising his bright green eye-lights to look at me.
‘How goes the work?’
‘I feel like a warsmith, back in the foundries of the forge worlds, when I
was flesh. The specifications you have asked for are difficult, but not
impossible. I enjoy a challenge.’
I took several sheets of paper from my coat pocket and handed them to
him. ‘More notes, taken during my last interview with Glaw. I’ve
underlined the key remarks. Here, he suggests electrum for the cap piece.’
‘I was going to use iron, or an iron alloy. Electrum. That makes sense.’
He took my notes over to a raised planning table that was littered with
scrolls, holoquills, measuring tools and data-slates. Pages of notes that I had
already provided him with were piled up, along with the psychometrically
captured images Ungish had drawn from my mind of the Cadian pylons,
Cherubael, Prophaniti, and the ornaments he had worn.
‘I’m also pondering the lodestone for the cap. I considered pyraline or
one of the other tele-empathic crystallines like epidotrichite, but I doubt any
of them would have the durability for your purposes. Certainly not for more
than one or two uses. I also thought of tabular zanthroclase.’
‘What’s that?’
‘A silicate we use in mind-impulse devices. But I’m not convinced. I
have a few other possibilities in mind.’ It was a measure of the trust Bure
showed me that he felt he could mention such Cult Mechanicus secrets so
freely. I felt honoured.
‘Here’s the haft,’ he said, showing me to the etching bench where the two
servitors were machining the decoration of the long pole.
‘Steel?’
‘Superficially. There’s a titanium core surrounded by an adamantium
sleeve under the steel jacket. The titanium is drilled with channels that carry
the conductive lapidorontium wires.’
‘It looks perfect,’ I said.
‘It is perfect. Virtually perfect. It’s machined to within a nanometre of
your measurements. Let me show you the sword.’
I followed him to a workbench at the far end of the smithy where the
sword lay on a rest under a dust sheet.
‘What do you think?’ he asked, drawing the cloth back.
Barbarisater was as beautiful as I remembered it. I admired the fresh
pentagrammatic wards that had been etched in the blade since I had last
seen it, ten on each side.
‘It is a remarkable artifact. I was almost unwilling to make the alterations
you requested. As it was, I wore out eight adamantium drill bits on this side
alone. The hardened steel skin of the blade around the solid core has been
folded and beaten nine hundred times. It is beyond anything we can
manufacture today.’
I would owe Clan Esw Sweydyr for this weapon, as I already owed them
for Arianrhod’s life. I should have returned it to their care, for it was part of
their clan legacy and usuril, or ‘living story’. It was mine to safeguard, not
to take, and certainly not to deface this way. But face to face with
Prophaniti at Kasr Gesh I had learned two things. Indeed, that monstrous
thing had told them to me. Pentagrammatic wards worked against
daemonhosts, but they were no stronger than the weapon that bore them.
To my certain knowledge, there were few finer, stronger blades in human
space. I would make my peace and apologies to the clans of Carthae in
time, fates permitting.
I went to touch it, but Bure stopped me. ‘It is still resting. We must
respect its anima. In a few days, you can take it. Train with it well. You
must know it intimately before you use it in combat.’
He accompanied me to the door of the forge. ‘Both weapons must be
blessed and consecrated before use. I cannot do that, though I can
ceremonially dedicate their manufacture to the Machine God.’
‘I have already planned for their consecration,’ I said. ‘But I would
welcome your ceremony. When I go against Quixos, I can think of no more
potent a patron god to be looking down over me than your Machine Lord.’
‘WE WILL BE leaving in a few days,’ I told him.
The casket was silent for a while. ‘I will miss our conversations,
Eisenhorn.’
‘Nevertheless, I have to go.’
‘You think you’re ready?’
‘I think this part of my readiness is complete. Is there anything else you
can tell me?’
‘I have been wondering that. I cannot think of anything. Except...’
‘Except what?’
The lights around the engram sphere twinkled. ‘Except this. Apart from
everything you’ve learned from me, the secrets, the lore, the mysteries, you
must know that going after this foe is... dangerous.’
I laughed involuntarily. ‘I think I’ve worked that much out already,
Pontius!’
‘No, you don’t know what I mean. You have the determination, I know,
the ambition, I know that too – you have the knowledge, we assume, and
the weapons too, we hope – but unless your mind is prepared, you will
perish. Instantly, and no ward or staff or blade or rune will save you.’
‘You sound like... you care if I lose.’
‘Do I? Then consider this, Gregor Eisenhorn. You may deem me a
monster beneath contempt, but if I do care, what does that say about me? Or
you?’
‘Goodbye, Pontius Glaw,’ I said, and closed the cell hatches behind me
for the last time.
I WILL RECORD this thought now, because I feel I must. For all that
Pontius Glaw was... and for all that came later, I cannot shake my bond to
him, though I try. There, in the cell on Cinchare, and a century before in the
dim hold of the Essene, we had spoken together for hundreds of hours. I
had no doubt that he was an unforgivably evil thing, and that he would have
killed me in a second during those times had he been allowed the chance.
But he was a being of extraordinary intellect, wit and learning. Admirable
in so many, strange ways. But for that tore, Aaa’s tore, back on that spring
day on Quenthus, his life may have been different.
And if it had been different, and we had met, we would have been the
greatest of friends.
WE HAD STAYED on Cinchare for three months. Too long, in my opinion,
but there had been no way to speed the preparatory work.
We celebrated Candlemas in the little chapel of the Ministorum off the
plaza, lighting candles to welcome the new Imperial year, and lighting
others to commemorate the town’s dead. Aemos and Bequin read the
lessons, for all of the Ecclesiarchs were amongst the remembered dead.
Bure and his tech-adepts worshipped with us, and he hovered to the choir
rail under the great statue of the God-Emperor to lead us in the devotional
prayers.
I was fretful and edgy. Partly because I was anxious to get underway
now, but also because of the lore in my head, the mysteries to which Glaw
had introduced me. So much, so much of it dark. I knew I was a changed
man, and that change was permanent.
But I considered that a year before – just a year, though it felt much,
much longer – I had been a helpless prisoner in the bleak Carnificina, and
Candlemas had passed me by before I had realised it.
I was not that man any more either, and that change had been nothing to
do with Pontius Glaw’s whispered secrets. For all the darkness swilling in
my head, it was better to be here, strong and ready, fortified, in the
company of friends and allies.
There was no choirmaster to play the organ, so Medea had brought her
father’s Glavian lyre, and played the Holy Triumph of the Golden Throne
so that we could all sing.
THAT NIGHT, WE feasted in the refectory of the Cult Mechanicus to honour
the start of 341.M41. Maxilla, who remained on duty aboard the Essene,
sent a banquet to us on a shuttle, along with servitors to wait upon us. One
of them reported that a vast storm of meteors had swarmed across the sky at
the stroke of midnight, lighting the night side of Cinchare with their fires.
Nayl growled that this was a bad omen, but Inshabel insisted it was a good
one.
I suppose it rather depended which part of the vast spread of the
Imperium you came from.
THE OTHERS SPENT the next two days packing up and making ready to
leave, but Aemos and I attended the dedication ceremony in the cimeliarch
of the Adeptus Mechanicus annex.
Machine Cult servitors chanted in a modulated binary code and beat upon
kettledrums. Magos Bure was clad in his orange robes with a white stole
over his shoulders.
He blessed the weapons he had made in turn, taking one then the other
from the two tech-adepts who stood in attendance.
Barbarisater, the pentagrammatic power sword, lifted to the light that
speared down from the eyes of the Machine God’s altar. Then the runestaff,
Bure’s masterpiece.
He had fashioned a cap-piece for the rune-etched steel pole out of
electrum in the form of a sun-flare corona. In the centre of it was a human
skull, marked with the thirteenth sign of castigation. The skull was the
lodestone, carved by Bure himself into a perfect facsimile of my own skull,
as measured by radiative scans. He had tried and rejected over twenty
different tele-empathic crystals before finding one he trusted would be up to
the task.
‘It’s beautiful,’ I said, taking it from him. ‘What crystal did you use in the
end?’
‘What else?’ he said. ‘I carved that copy of your skull from the Lith
itself.’
HE CAME TO see us off, to the docking barn where the gun-cutter had sat
for so long. Nayl and Fischig were carrying the last things aboard. We had
broken astropathic silence at last the night before, and informed Imperial
Allied, Ortog Promethium, the Adeptus Mechanicus and the Imperial
authorities of the fate that had befallen Cinchare Minehead. We would be
long gone before any of them arrived to begin recovery work.
Bure said farewell to Aemos, who shuffled away to the cutter.
‘There’s nothing adequate I can say,’ I told the magos.
‘Nor I to you, Eisenhorn. What of... the inmate?’
‘I’d like you to do what I asked you. Give him mobility at least. But
nothing more. He must remain a prisoner, now and always.’
‘Very well. I expect to hear all about your victory, Eisenhorn. I will be
waiting.’
‘May the Holy Machine God and the Emperor himself protect your
systems, Geard.’
‘Thank you,’ he said. Then he added something that quite took me aback,
given his total belief and reliance on technology.
‘Good luck.’
I walked to the cutter. He watched me for a moment, then disappeared,
closing the inner hatch after him.
That was the last time I ever saw him.
FROM CINCHARE, THE Essene ran back, fast and impatient, into the great
territories of the Segmentum Obscurus, a three month voyage that we broke
twice.
At Ymshalus, we stopped to transmit the prepared communiqués, all
twenty of them. Inshabel and Fischig left us too at that point; Inshabel to
secure passage to Elvara Cardinal to begin his work there, and Fischig for
the long haul back to Cadia. It would be months, if not years, before we saw
them again. That was a sorrowful farewell.
At Palobara, that crossroads on the border, busy with trading vessels and
obscura caravans guarded by mercenary gunships, we stopped and
transmitted the carta declaration. There was no going back now. Here, I
parted company with Bequin, Nayl and Aemos, all of whom were heading
back to the Helican sub-sector by a variety of means. Bequin’s goal was
Messina, and Aemos, with Nayl to watch over him, was bound for Gudrun.
Another hard parting.
THE ESSENE CONTINUED on for Orbul Infanta. This was now a lonely,
waiting time. Each night, the remains of my company gathered in Maxilla’s
dining room and ate together: myself, Medea, Maxilla and Ungish. Ungish
was no company, and even Medea and Maxilla had lost their sparkle. They
missed the others, and I think they knew how dark and tough the time ahead
would be.
I spent my days reading in the cabin library of the cutter, or playing
regicide with Medea. I practised with Barbarisater in the hold spaces,
slowly mastering the tricks of its weight and balance. I would never match a
Carthae-born master, but I had always been good enough with a sword.
Barbarisater was an extraordinary piece. I came to know it and it came to
know me. Within a week, it was responding to my will, channelling it so
hard that the rune marks glowed with manifesting psychic power. It had a
will of its own, and once it was in my hands, ready, swinging, it was
difficult to stop it pulling and slicing where it pleased. It hungered for
blood... or if not blood, then at least the joy of battle. On two separate
occasions, Medea came into the hold to see if I was bored enough for
another round of regicide, and I had to restrain the steel from lunging at her.
Its sheer length was a problem: I had never used a blade so long. I
worried that I would do my own extremities harm. But practice gave me the
gift of it: long-armed, flowing moves, sweeping strokes, a tight field of
severing. Within a fortnight, I had mastered the knack of spinning it over in
my hand, my open palm and the pommel circling around each other like the
discs of a gyroscope. I was proud of that move. I think Barbarisater taught it
to me.
I worked with the rune staff too, to get used to its feel and balance.
Though my aim was appalling, especially over distances further than three
or four metres, I became able to channel my will, through my hands, into its
haft and then project it from the crystal skull in the form of electrical bolts
that dented deck plating.
There was, of course, no way I could test it for its primary use.
WE REACHED THE shrine world of Orbul Infanta at the end of the twelfth
week. I had three tasks to perform here, and the first was the consecration
of the sword and the staff.
With Ungish and Medea, I travelled down to the surface in one of the
Essene’s unremarkable little launches rather than the gun-cutter. We went to
Ezropolis, one of Orbul Infanta’s ten thousand shrine cities, in the baking
heartland of the western continent.
Orbul Infanta is an Ecclesiarchy governed world, famously blessed with
a myriad shrines, each one dedicated to a different Imperial saint, and each
one the heart of a city state. The Ecclesiarch chose it as a shrine world
because it lay on a direct line between Terra and Avignor. The most popular
and thriving shrine cities lay on the coast of the eastern continent, and
billions of the faithful flocked to them each year. Ezropolis was far away
from such bustle.
Saint Ezra, who had been martyred in 670.M40, was the patron saint of
undertaking and setting forth, which I took to be appropriate. His city was a
shimmering growth of steel, glass and stone rising from the sun-cooked
plains of the mid-west. According to the guide slates, all water was pumped
in from the western coast along vast pipelines two thousand kilometres
long.
We made planetfall at Ezra Plain, the principal landing facility, and
joined the queues of pilgrims climbing the looping stairs into the citadel.
Most were clad in yellow, the saint’s colour, or had tags or swathes of
yellow cloth adorning them. All carried lit candles or oil lamps, despite the
unforgiving light. Ezra had promised to light a flame in the darkness to
mark all those setting forth, and consequently his hagial colour was flame
yellow.
We had done the necessary research. I wore a suit of black linen with a
sash of yellow silk and carried a burning votive candle. Ungish was draped
in a pale yellow robe the colour of the sun at dawn, and clutched a plaster
figurine of the saint. Medea wore a dark red bodyglove under a tabard on
which was sewn a yellow aquila symbol. She pushed the small grav-cart on
which Barbarisater and the staff lay, wrapped in yellow velvet. It was
common for pilgrims to cart their worldly goods to the shrine of Ezra, in
order that they might be blessed before any kind of undertaking or setting
forth could properly get underway. We blended easily with the teaming
lines of sweating, anxious devotees.
At the top of the stairs, we entered the blessed cool of the streets, where
the shadows of the buildings fell across us. It was nearly midday, and
Ecclesiarchy choirs were singing from the platforms that topped the high,
slender towers. Bells were chiming, and yellow sapfinches were being
released by the thousand from basket cages in the three city squares. The
thrumming ochre clouds of birds swirled up above us, around us, singing in
bewilderment. They were brought in each day, a million at a time, from
gene-farm aviaries on the coast, where they were bred in industrial
quantities. They were not native to this part of Orbul Infanta, and would
perish within hours of release into the parched desert. It was reported that
the plains around Ezropolis were ankle-deep with the residue of their white
bones and bright feathers.
But still, they were the symbol of undertaking and setting forth, and so
they were set loose by the million to certain death every midday. There is a
terrible irony to this which I have often thought of bringing to the attention
of the Ecclesiarchy.
WE WENT TO the Cathedral of Saint Ezra Outlooking, a significant temple
on the western side of the city. On every eave and wall top we passed,
sapfinches perched and twittered with what seemed to me to be indignation.
The cathedral itself was admittedly splendid, a Low Gothic minster
raised in the last thirty years and paid for by subscriptions generated by the
city fathers and priesthood. Every visitor who entered the city walls was
obliged to deposit two high denomination coins into the take boxes at either
side of the head of the approach stairs. A yellow robed adept of the
priesthood was there to see it was done. The box on the left was the
collection for the maintenance and construction of the city temples. The one
on the right was the sapfinch fund.
We went inside Saint Ezra Outlooking, into the cool of the marble nave
where the faithful were bent in prayer and the hard sunlight made coloured
patterns on everything as it slanted through the huge, stained glass
windows. The cool air was sweetened by the smoke of sweetwood burners,
and livened by the jaunty singing from the cantoria.
I left Medea and Ungish in the arched doorway beside a tomb on which
lay the graven image of a Space Marine of the Raven Guard Chapter, his
hands arranged so as to indicate which holy crusade he had perished in.
I found the provost of the cathedral, and explained to him what I wanted.
He looked at me blankly, fidgeting with his yellow robes, but I soon made
him understand by depositing six large coins into his alms chest, and
another two into his hand.
He ushered me into a baptism chancel, and I beckoned my colleagues to
follow. Once all of us were inside, he drew shut the curtains and opened his
breviary. As he began the rite, Medea unwrapped the devices and laid them
on the edge of the benitier. The provost mumbled on and, keeping his eyes
fixed on the open book so he wouldn’t lose his place, raised and unscrewed
a flask of chrism with which he anointed both the staff and the sword.
‘In blessing and consecrating these items, I worship the Emperor who is
my god, and charge those who bring these items forth that they do so
without taint of concupiscence. Do you make that pledge?’
I realised he was looking at me. I raised my head from the kneeling bow I
had adopted. Concupiscence. A desire for the forbidden. Did I dare make
that vow, knowing what I knew?
‘Well?’
‘I am without taint, puritus,’ I replied.
He nodded and continued with the consecration.
THE FIRST PART of my business was done. We went out into the courtyard
in front of the cathedral.
‘Take these back to the launch and stow them safely,’ I told Medea,
indicating the swaddled weapons on the cart.
‘What’s concupiscence?’ she asked.
‘Don’t worry about it,’ I said.
‘Did you just lie, Gregor?’
‘Shut up and go on with you.’
Medea wheeled the cart away through the pilgrim crowds.
‘She’s a sharp girl, heretic,’ Ungish whispered.
‘Actually, you can shut up too,’ I said.
‘I damn well won’t,’ she snapped. ‘This is it.’
‘What? “It”?’
‘In my dreams, I saw you foreswear in front of an Imperial altar. I saw it
happen, and my death followed.’
I watched the sapfinches spiralling in the air above the yard.
‘Déjà vu.’
‘I know déjà vu from a dream,’ said Ungish sourly. ‘I know déjà vu from
my backside.’
‘The God-Emperor watches over us,’ I reassured her.
‘Yes, I know he does,’ she said. ‘I just think he doesn’t like what he
sees.’
WE WAITED UNTIL evening in the yard, buying hot loaves, wraps of diced
salad and treacly black caffeine from street vendors. Ungish didn’t eat
much. Long shadows fell across the yard in the late afternoon light. I voxed
Medea. She was safely back aboard the launch, waiting for us.
I was waiting to complete the second of my tasks. This was the appointed
day, and the appointed hour was fast approaching. This would be the first
test of the twenty communiqués I had sent out. One had been to Inquisitor
Gladus, a man I admired, and had worked with effectively thirty years
before during the P’glao Conspiracy. Orbul Infanta was within his canon. I
had written to him, laying out my case and asking for his support. Asking
him to meet me here, at this place, at this hour.
It was, like all the messages, a matter of trust. I had only written to men
or women I felt were beyond reproach, and who, no matter what they
thought of me, might do me the grace of meeting with me to discuss the
matter of Quixos. If they rejected me or my intent, that was fine. I didn’t
expect any of them to turn me in or attempt to capture me.
We waited. I was impatient, edgy... edgy still with the dark mysteries
Pontius Glaw had planted in my head. I hadn’t slept well in four months.
My temper was short.
I expected Gladus to come, or at least send some kind of message. He
might be detained or delayed, or caught up in his own noble business. But I
didn’t think he’d ignore me. I searched the evening crowds for some trace
of his long-haired, bearded form, his grey robes, his barb-capped staff.
‘HE’S NOT COMING,’ said Ungish.
‘Oh, give it a rest.’
‘Please, inquisitor, I want to go. My dream...’
‘Why don’t you trust me, Ungish? I will protect you,’ I said. I opened my
black linen coat so she could see the laspistol holstered under my left arm.
‘Why?’ she fretted. ‘Because you’re playing with fire. You’ve crossed
the line.’
I balked. ‘Why did you say that?’ I asked, hearing Pontius’s words loud
in my head.
‘Because you have, damn you! Heretic! Bloody heretic!’
‘Stop it!’
She got to her feet from the courtyard bench unsteadily. Pilgrims were
turning to look at the sound of her outburst.
‘Heretic!’
‘Stop it, Tasaera! Sit down! No one’s going to hurt you!’
‘Says you, heretic! You’ve damned us all with your ways! And I’m the
one who’s going to pay! I saw it in my dream... this place, this hour... your
lie at the altar, the circling birds...’
‘I didn’t lie,’ I said, tugging her back down onto the bench.
‘He’s coming,’ she whispered.
‘Who? Gladus?’
She shook her head. ‘Not Gladus. He’s never coming. None of them are
coming. They’ve all read your pretty, begging letters and erased them.
You’re a heretic and they won’t begin to deal with you.’
‘I know the people I’ve written to, Ungish. None of them would dismiss
me so.’
She looked round into my face, her head-cage hissing as it adjusted. Her
eyes were full of tears.
‘I’m so afraid, Eisenhorn. He’s coming.’
‘Who is?’
‘The hunter. That’s all my dream showed. A hunter, blank and invisible.’
‘You worry too much. Come with me.’
WE WENT BACK into the Cathedral of Saint Ezra Outlooking, and took
seats in the front of the ranks of carrels. Evening sunlight raked sidelong
through the windows. The statue of the saint, raised behind the rood screen,
looked majestic.
‘Better now?’ I asked.
‘Yes,’ she snivelled.
I kept glancing around, hoping that Gladus would appear. Straggles of
pilgrims were arriving for the evening devotion.
Maybe he wasn’t coming. Maybe Ungish was right. Maybe I was more of
a pariah than I imagined, even to old friends and colleagues.
Maybe Gladus had read my humble communiqué and discarded it with a
curse. Maybe he had sent it to the arbites... or the Ecclesiarchy... or the
Inquisition’s Officio of Internal Prosecution.
‘Two more minutes,’ I assured her. ‘Then we’ll go.’ It was long past the
hour I had asked Gladus to meet me.
I looked about again. Pilgrims were by now flooding into the cathedral
through the main doors.
There was a gap in the flow, a space where a man should have been. It
was quite noticeable, with the pilgrims jostling around it but never entering
it.
My eyes widened. In the gap was a glint of energy, like a side-flash from
a mirror shield.
‘Ungish,’ I hissed, reaching for my weapon.
Bolt rounds came screaming down the nave towards me from the gap.
Pilgrims shrieked in panic and fled in all directions.
‘The hunter!’ Ungish wailed. ‘Blank and invisible!’
He was that. With his mirror shield activated, he was just a heat-haze
blur, marked only by the bright flare of his weapon.
Mass panic had seized the cathedral. Pilgrims were trampling other
pilgrims in their race to flee.
The backs of the carrels exploded with wicked punctures as the bolt
rounds blew through them.
I fired back, down the aisle, with tidy bursts of las-fire.
‘Thorn wishes Aegis, craven hounds at the hindmost!’
That was all I was able to send before a bolt round glanced sidelong into
my neck and threw me backwards, destroying my vox headset in the
process.
I rolled on the marble floor, bleeding all over the place.
‘Eisenhorn! Eisenhorn!’ Ungish bawled and then screamed in agony.
I saw her thrown back through the panelled wood of the box pews,
demolishing them. A bolt round had hit her square in the stomach. Bleeding
out, she writhed on the floor amid the wood splinters, wailing and crying.
I tried to crawl across to her as further, heedless bolt-fire fractured the
rest of the front pews.
I looked up. Witchfinder Arnaut Tantalid disengaged his mirror shield
and gazed down at me.
‘You are an accursed heretic, Eisenhorn, and that fact is now proven
beyond doubt by the carta issued for you. In the name of the Ministorum of
Mankind, I claim your life.’
TWENTY-ONE
Death at St Ezra’s.
The long hunt.
The cell of five.
PRECISELY HOW HE had found me was a mystery, but I believe he had been
on my tail for a long time, since before Cinchare. The fact that he had come
to Saint Ezra Outlooking at that hour and that day convinced me that he had
intercepted my communiqué to Gladus. And he might have triumphed over
me, right there, right then, if he’d but pressed the advantage and finished
the job with his boltgun.
Instead, Tantalid holstered his bolt pistol and drew his ancient
chainsword, Theophantus, intent on delivering formal execution with the
holy weapon.
I fired my laspistol, powering shot after shot at him, driving him
backwards. His gold-chased battle suit, which gave his shrivelled frame the
bulk and proportions of a Space Marine, absorbed or deflected the impacts,
but the sheer force knocked him back several paces.
I jumped up, firing again, and retreating down the epistle side of the
cathedral, towards the feretory. Bystanders and church servants were still
fleeing. Its iron teeth singing, Theophantus swung at me. Tantalid was
barking out the Accusal of Heresy, verse after verse.
Be quiet! I yelled, enforcing my will.
The psychic sting shocked him into silence, but he was generally
protected by psi-dampers and ignored my next will-driven order to ‘desist’
completely.
The chainsword revved around and I threw myself aside as it cleft a
bench pew in two. The backswing nearly caught me, but I dodged behind a
pier column that took the force of the blow in a splintering shower of sparks
and stone chippings.
Ungish was still crying out in pain. The sound chilled and infuriated me.
I fired my laspistol again, but the last few shots fizzed and spluttered,
underpowered. The power cell was exhausted. I dived again, feinting past
his slow-moving bulk, and grappled with him from behind. It was a
desperate ploy. Unarmoured as I was, I stood little chance of overwhelming
his brute force or hurting him. He got a steel-gloved paw round behind
himself, grabbed me by the coat and tore me off him.
My coat ripped. I bounced hard off a pillar and crashed awkwardly
through the delicate fretwork of a confessional screen. I had barely pulled
myself out of the flimsy wooden wreckage when the chainsword swooped
in again and chewed a deep gouge in the cathedral floor.
I ran from him then, across the south aisle towards the feretory. Two men
of the cathedral’s Frateris Militia, clearly seeking advancement by coming
to the aid of the fearsome Ministorum witch-hunter, closed in to block my
escape. They were both clad in Ezra’s yellow and carried short stave-maces
in one hand and temple lanterns in the other.
I think they both quickly regretted their enthusiastic involvement.
I didn’t even bother with the will. I think my rage was too great to have
used it cleanly anyway. I side-stepped the first mace, caught and broke the
wrist that wielded it, and kicked the man down. The mace turned in the air
as it flew from the sprawling oafs useless hand, and I caught it and turned it
cross-wise in time to block the down-stroke of the other man’s club. As he
bounced back with the recoil of his own, negated strike, I smacked him in
the side of the knee with my captured weapon. He fell over with sharp wail
of pain, losing hold of his own mace and trying to beat me with his temple
lamp instead. I took the lamp away from him and kicked him in the belly so
he doubled up on his side, sobbing and trying to remember how to breathe.
The first man was back up, running at me. I spun and smashed the temple
lamp in his face, sideways. Both its light and his went out.
The paving shook as Tantalid hove down on me. I used the captured
mace like a sword, double-handed, to deflect his first strokes. It was iron-
banded hardwood, and tough, but no match for a chainsword. After three or
so clashes, the mace was chewed and mangled. I threw it aside and tore a
church standard down from the wall beside the feretory door. Theophantus
immediately shredded the old embroidered cloth and wood-frame titulus
from the end, but that left me with three metres of cast-iron pole.
I held it like a quarterstaff, striking Tantalid hard on the side of the head
with one end and then square on the opposite hip with the other. Then I
stabbed the end at him viciously, like a spear-thrust, and managed to dent
the chest-plate of his armour.
In response – and frothing mad with anger himself now – he put up
Theophantus and shortened my pole by about half a metre. I wrenched the
remaining pole around one-handed and struck him on the other side of the
head. Blood was spilling from his ears. He howled and made an attack that
almost took my arm off.
My third attempt to clip his miserable head missed. He was wise to it
now, and blocked with his chainsword. The chain teeth caught in the pole
and plucked it from my hands, throwing it up ten metres into the air. It
landed behind some pews with a loud, echoing clang.
I rocked back from the follow up, but the murderous saw caught my right
shoulder and gashed me deeply. Clutching the wound, I ducked again, and
Theophantus decapitated a statue of Saint Ezra’s pardoner.
No matter what I did, it was going his way. He had the weapons and the
armour on his side. And now I was bleeding badly, which meant I would
progressively slow and weaken, and it was just a matter for him to keep
pressing the onslaught and he would triumph.
I became aware of another commotion near the main doors of the great
church. Many startled worshippers and hierarchs had retreated and gathered
there to watch the holy combat. Now they were spilling aside, their huddle
breaking. A figure stormed through them.
Medea.
She ran down the main aisle, calling to me, firing her needle pistol over
the tops of the pews at Tantalid. The lethal rounds pinged and clicked off
his armour, and he turned in annoyance.
Tantalid dragged out his boltpistol and fired at this new attack. Medea
hurled the object she had been carrying in her other hand and then
disappeared from view as she dived to evade the hammer blows of the bolt
rounds. At least, I prayed it was a deliberate dive. If he had hit her...
The object she had thrown bounced off a pew near me and landed on the
floor, spilling from its yellow cloth.
Barbarisater.
Risking dismemberment from the chainsword, I hurled myself at the
Carthaen blade. My hands found its long grip and I rolled twice to avoid the
next downstrike of Theophantus.
Barbarisater purred in my grip as I came up. The runes blazed with
vengeful light.
Tantalid realised that the nature of the battle had suddenly changed. I saw
it in his eyes.
My first swing severed his wrist, cutting clean through the power-
armoured cuff, dropping his hand to the floor, still clutching the smoking
boltgun.
My second met Theophantus and destroyed it, spraying disintegrating
chain-teeth and machine parts into the air.
My third cut Witchfinder Tantalid in two from the left shoulder to the
groin. Neither half of him made a sound as they fell apart onto the cathedral
floor.
Barbarisater was still seething with power, and twitched as Medea
emerged unhurt from behind a choir stall. I forced the hungry blade down.
‘Come on!’ she said.
Ungish was dead. There was nothing I could do for her. And there was so
much I should have done. She had been right. Right about this. Right about
her fate. I dreaded to think how much more of what she had said might
prove to be true too.
Hearing my frantic glossia call when Tantalid first attacked, Medea had
taken the launch up from Ezra Plain outside the city, despite all official
warnings for her to abort, and flown it right in, setting down in the
courtyard outside Saint Ezra Outlooking.
As we ran out now, into the evening, through crowds of stunned
onlookers who leapt out of our path, the city arbites and the Frateris Militia
were rising in alarmed response. There was no point waiting to face them.
The launch shot us skywards, back towards the Essene, to leave Orbul
Infanta as fast as we could.
IT WAS A mess, and I was terribly disheartened. The confidence with
which we had all set out from Cinchare seemed to have dissolved. Orbul
Infanta had been just the first part of a long stratagem, and thanks to
Tantalid, it had ended badly. I’d failed to contact Gladus, and discovered
that as careful as I had been, my communiqués were not secure. The third
task I had planned to undertake on Orbul Infanta, a search of the Imperial
archivum for certain information relating to Quixos, hadn’t even been
started.
At least the weapons were consecrated. And Barbarisater had more than
proved itself in combat.
FRIGATES OF THE Frateris Militia, along with several Imperial Navy guard
boats, attempted to block the Essene, but Maxilla’s navigator got us out of
the system and real space before they could even close range. Some ships
pursued us into the warp, and we were chased for eight days, finally losing
our pursuers through a series of real-space decelerations and redirections.
We went to ground. A month at a low-tech depot on a farming world,
another two at the automated station at Kwyle. I was jumping at shadows
by then, expecting enemies and rivals to loom out of every doorway. But it
was quiet and we were unmolested. Maxilla had made a career out of
passing unnoticed and avoiding attention. He lent that practiced art to our
cause now, and reassured me into the bargain.
THREE MONTHS AFTER leaving Orbul Infanta in such haste, we risked a run
to Gloricent, an outlying but prosperous trade world in the Antimar sub-
sector, another division of the Scarus Sector, just two sub-sectors over from
the Helican sub itself. Though worlds like Gudrun and Thracian Primaris
were a good four months away by starship, it felt a little like being home.
Disguised, Medea and I visited the sea-lashed stone piles of one of the main
trade-hives, and procured a pair of astropaths, hiring their services from the
local commercial guild on an open-ended lease.
Their names were Adgur and Ueli, both young males, both psychically
capable but dull-witted and emotionless. Their young heads were shaved
and their plugs shiny and new, and they spoke to me in overly formal ways
that sounded like the parrot-learned etiquette it sadly was. But their eyes
were ringed with darkness and their flesh was losing its youthful lustre. The
rigour of the astropathic life was already taking its toll.
USING THEM, I sent fresh communiqués that superceded the original ones
and revised certain aspects of my scheme. None of the messages now
suggested the sort of trial meetings I had attempted with Gladus. I would
not give so much away now.
After a week, and no responses, we left Gloricent and went, via
Mimonon to Sarum, the capital world of the Antimar sub-sector. I managed
to do some useful work in its libraries, but backed off when a sour little
confessor on a research sabbatical took to following me as if he recognised
me.
While at anchor off Sarum, I got my first responses, all coded: from
Bequin on Messina, and from Aemos on Gudrun. Both reported that their
parts of the plan were going much more smoothly than mine had. Two days
later, a partially scrambled astropathic message came from Inshabel on
Elvara Cardinal. What parts I got of it seemed to indicate some success. I
was impatient to know more.
The week before we left Sarum, I received two more, both anonymous,
one from Thracian Primaris, the other from a cluster of slave-worlds that
owed fealty to the Salies Province of the Ophidian sub-sector. From the
careful code and language of both, I recognised their senders.
My spirits lifted.
AFTER THAT IMPROVEMENT, things again seemed to slow and stagnate.
There was no progress, and no further communications. We were forced to
quit Lorwen, our next stop after Sarum, with unseemly haste, when a flotilla
of warships from Battlefleet Reaver arrived. I know now that the Battlefleet
manoeuvres at Lorwen – and incidentally at Sarum and Femis Major too –
were part of a major precautionary deployment against a pair of space hulks
that had suddenly roamed into the sub-sector. But they caused us over
thirteen weeks of anxious hiding amongst the brown and black dwarf stars
of an extinguished stellar nursery.
Another Candlemas went by while we were in the empyrean, en route to
the Drewlian Group. Medea, Maxilla and I marked it together, just the three
of us. The two astropaths and the navigator were not invited to attend. I
raised a glass to toast the continued success of our mission. I don’t think I
would have been so hearty if I had known it would be another full year
before the final act of the plan would play out.
I SPENT THE first four months of 342 fruitlessly engaged in a search for
the celebrated precog-hermit Lukas Cassian in the stinking marshes of
Drewlia Two, only to learn that he had been murdered by a Monodominant
cult four years earlier. During that quest, I terminated the activities of a
plague-daemon sect infesting the marshlands. That was quite an
undertaking in its own right, but my full account of it is filed in the
Inquisition archives separately, and it has no bearing on this record.
Besides, I still regard it bitterly as an interruption and waste of time. Neither
will I set down here the full story of Nathan Inshabel’s ventures on Elvara
Cardinal, or Harlon Nayl’s frankly extraordinary experiences on Bimus
Tertius, though both tales connect to this record. Inshabel has written his
own, refreshingly witty account of his exploits, which may be accessed by
those with the appropriate clearance, something I recommend as
illuminating and rewarding. Nayl asked me not to include his story, and has
never committed it to record. It may be learned only by those with the
temerity to ask him and the money to pay for a long night’s serious
drinking.
All this while, I remained an Imperial outlaw, wanted by the Inquisition
for my heresies. It is interesting to note that at no time during this period
did the Inquisition formally refute or overturn the carta I had declared on
Quixos.
THE YEAR 343.M41 was half gone already by the time the Essene took
me to Thessalon, a feudal world near Hesperus in the Helican sub-sector. It
had been chosen by Nayl as the point for our secret congregation.
Commanding a twenty man field team selected from my staff on Gudrun,
he arrived a week before the rest of us to secure the location and make sure
we were not compromised. His preparations were thorough and ingenious.
No one entered the area without him knowing it, nor could anyone have
done so. At the slightest sign of outside interruption or official interference,
we would have ample time to withdraw and flee. As a final precaution, I
was the last to arrive.
THESSALON IS A tough little world whose population lives in a dark age
and knows nothing of the Imperium or the galaxy beyond its skies.
The meeting place was a ruined keep in the north of the second continent,
two thousand kilometres from the nearest indigenous community. A few
lonely animal herders and subsistence farmers undoubtedly saw the lights
of our ships in their heavens, but to them they were just the portents of the
gods and the bright eyes of fabulous beasts.
MEDEA DEPOSITED ME at the edge of a conifer forest at nightfall, and then
took the gun-cutter back to stand off as air-cover, ready to redeploy at a
moment’s notice. For the first time in over two standard years, I was
dressed as an inquisitor in black leather, storm coat and proudly displayed
rosette. I also wore my faith-harness with the engraving Puritus. Damn
anyone who believed I wasn’t worthy of it.
Nayl, in combat armour, with a laser carbine cradled over one arm,
appeared out of the trees and greeted me. We shook hands. It was good to
see him again. His men, who were all around I was sure, were invisible in
the gathering darkness.
Nayl led me through the black woods into a break in the trees where the
pine tops framed a perfect oval of starfilled mauve. The keep, a jumbled
pile of grey stone, stood in the clearing, with hooded lamps glowing from
the lower slit windows.
Nayl walked me past and around the alarm-sensors, the tripwires and the
beams of motion detectors that webbed the structure. Servitor-skulls from
my personal arsenal hovered in the shadows, alert and armed.
Bequin and Aemos met me under the broken entrance arch. Aemos
looked pale and worried, but his face broke into a warm smile as he saw
me. Bequin hugged me.
‘How many?’ I asked her.
‘Four,’ she said.
Not bad. Not great, but not bad. It rather depended who those four were.
‘And everything else?’
‘All the preparations are now set. We can begin this undertaking at any
time,’ Aemos said.
‘We have a target?’
‘We do. You’ll learn how when we brief everyone.’
‘Good,’ I paused. ‘Anything else I should know?’
All three of them shook their heads.
‘Let’s do it then,’ I said.
DESPITE ALL THE precautions, I was taking my life in my hands. I was
presenting myself, voluntarily, to four members of the Inquisition. I was
trusting that my previous friendships and allegiances with them would
count for more than the accusations Osma had laid at my door. These four
were the only four who had responded out of the original twenty
communiqués. Nayl had vetted each one, but there was still a very real
chance that any or all of them had attended simply to execute the declared
heretic Gregor Eisenhorn. I would soon know.
AS I STEPPED into the main, candlelit chamber, a hush killed the small talk
and six men turned to face me. Fischig, imposing in black body armour,
nodded me a half-smile. Interrogator Inshabel, in a bodyglove and
lightweight cloak, bowed his head and smiled nervously.
The other four stared at me levelly.
I walked into their midst solemnly.
The first lowered the hood of his maroon cape. It was Titus Endor.
‘Hello, Gregor,’ he said.
‘Well met, old friend,’ Endor had been one of the first two to contact me
anonymously the previous year, from the Salies slave-worlds. The other,
who had written from Thracian Primaris, stood next to him.
‘Commodus Voke. You honour me with your presence.’
The wizened old wretch sneered at me. ‘For the sake of our history, and
damn-his-eyes Lyko, and other matters, I am here, Eisenhorn, though the
Emperor knows I am very suspicious of this. I will hear you out, and if I
don’t like what you have to say, I will withdraw... without breaking the
confidence of this meeting!’ he added sternly with a raised finger. ‘I will
not betray this congress, but I reserve the right to leave and quit if I find it
worthless.’
‘That right is yours, Commodus.’
To his left stood a tall, confident man I didn’t recognise. He wore brown
leather flak armour under a long blue coat of cavalry twill and his silver
rosette was fixed on the left breast. His domed head was shaved, but there
was a violet glint in his eyes that told me he was a Cadian.
‘Inquisitor Raum Grumman,’ said Fischig, stepping forward. Grumman
took my proffered hand with a curt nod.
‘Inquisitor General Neve acknowledges your communiqué to her, and
asks me to express her true sadness that she could not join you here. She
personally requested me to take her place, and render you the service I
freely render her.’
‘I am grateful for it, Grumman. But right from the start, I want to be sure
that you know what we’re about here. Just being here because your
provincial chief requested it isn’t enough.’
The Cadian smiled. ‘Actually, it is. But to reassure you, I have reviewed
the matter carefully with Neve herself and your man Fischig. I have no
illusions about the danger of being here and siding with you. Given the
evidence, I would have been here anyway.’
‘Good. Excellent. Welcome, Grumman.’
The identity of the fourth and final guest took me aback. He was clad in
polished battleware plating that looked custom-made and exorbitantly
expensive. With gauntleted hands, he lifted the scowling houndskull helmet
off his head. Inquisitor Massimo Ricci, of the Helican Ordo Xenos. He was
hardly an old friend, but I knew him well.
‘Ricci?’
His handsome, haughty face displayed a wide smile.
‘Like Grumman, I am here to extend apologies from another. For
numerous reasons that I’m sure you can appreciate, Lord Rorken cannot
answer your request in person. It would be political suicide for him to
participate in this matter. But my lord has faith in you still, Eisenhorn. He
has sent me to act as his proxy.’
Ricci was one of Lord Rorken’s most valued and admired inquisitors.
Many said he was a likely successor for the post as a Master of the Ordo
Xenos. For him to be here was an enormous compliment, both from Lord
Rorken, who had seen fit to send one of his most illustrious men, and from
Ricci himself, who was risking a high-profile career just by being here.
Clearly both of them had taken my proposal and cause very seriously.
‘Gentlemen,’ I said. ‘I am pleased, and honoured, to see you all. Let us
discuss this matter, freely and openly, and see where we stand.’
THE THESSALONIAN NIGHT winds moaned through the ruined cavities of
the keep as I briefed them. Inshabel and Nayl had carried chairs in, and
erected a heavy trestle table. Bequin and Aemos provided data-slates,
charts, papers and other pieces of evidence as I called for them.
I talked for about two hours, taking them through the entire matter of
Quixos as it was known to me. Much of what I said had been laid out in the
initial communiqués, but I filled in all the details, and answered questions
as they arose. Endor seemed satisfied, and hardly spoke. It was good to
have a true friend here, one who simply trusted my word and purpose.
Grumman was also generally non-committal. Voke and Ricci asked plenty
of questions, and required clarification on the smallest points.
All three ordos were represented around that table: Voke was Ordo
Malleus – though thankfully not a tight member of Bezier’s inner circle –
Ricci and I were Ordo Xenos, and Grumman and Endor were Ordo
Hereticus. All of us apart from Grumman were assigned servants of the
Ordos Inquisitorae Helican. Only Titus Endor, who I knew to be famously
demure, wasn’t wearing his rosette openly.
I BELIEVE I spoke eloquently and well.
We broke after two hours to stretch our legs, ruminate and take
refreshment. I went outside, taking in the cold night air, listening to the
wind swish the conifers. Fischig joined me and brought me a glass of wine.
‘It’s bad with Neve,’ he said, just getting right into it. He had travelled
back to Cadia from Cinchare to collect more data and to specifically recruit
the inquisitor general.
‘Because of me?’
He nodded. ‘Because of everything. Osma made big trouble after we
sprang you from the Carnificina. He had the combined clout of Bezier and
Orsini behind him, after all. That made Neve’s superior, Grandmaster
Nunthum of the Ordos Cadia, sit up and take notice, I can tell you. They
were after her for her job. But they couldn’t prove a thing. Neve’s very
good at being slippery. And she fought your corner like a she-bear too,
believe you me.’
‘She’s safe?’
‘Yeah. Thanks to a massive incursion of the Enemy eight months ago.
The Cadian Gate’s on a war footing and utterly in turmoil. Last thing
anyone’s worrying about is what part Neve may have played in the
Eisenhorn Conspiracy.’
‘That’s what they’re calling it?’
‘That’s what they’re calling it.’
I sipped the wine, expecting something rough and local. It turned out to
be a damned good Samatan red. From my own cellars, I guessed.
Bequin would have taken care of such things and chosen the very best to
mollify our guests.
‘Grumman: what do you make of him?’
‘I’ve got plenty of time for him, Gregor,’ Fischig said. ‘Smart mind,
knows what he’s doing. Given the scrutiny she was under, Neve knew she
couldn’t get away, so she picked Grumman, and I don’t think she would
have if he wasn’t worth his salt. The pair go back a long way, and
Grumman’s doing this out of respect for her. But we spent a long time
talking on the voyage back here, and I think he’s in it for himself now too.’
‘Good. The others?’
‘Voke’s full of surprises,’ he snorted. ‘When you said he was going to be
on your list of contacts, I thought you were mad. Not as mad as writing to
Lord Rorken, of course, but anyway... I never thought the old bastard would
show, or even deign to answer you. He’s so stiff even the rod up his arse has
got a rod up its arse. That’s one bet I would have lost. He must like you
more than he lets on.’
‘We have an understanding,’ I said. I’d saved Voke’s life on the flagship
Saint Scythus, but he’d returned that favour on the Avenue of the Victor
Bellum. Maybe that was enough.
‘He needs convincing,’ said Fischig, ‘but I think he’s in for the long
haul.’
‘You do?’
‘You see that creep Heldane anywhere?’
I knew what Fischig meant. Heldane would have opposed this mission
without question, and taken great delight in bringing me in, dead or alive.
Voke had clearly come here without his old pupil knowing. Fischig was
right. That was a good sign.
‘Endor, well, he’s safe, isn’t he?’ said Fischig. ‘Given your history, he’d
have come anyway.’
‘It’s good to have him here. What about Ricci?’
Fischig’s voice suddenly dropped to a hiss. ‘Speaking of whom.’
He withdrew. Clutching a goblet of wine, Ricci walked out of the
archway behind us and joined me, gazing up at the staggeringly bright star-
field.
‘I hope you realise how lucky you are,’ Ricci said.
‘Every day.’
‘You took a risk contacting Lord Rorken. He’s always liked you, but
given the current climate, liking you is a dangerous habit. He was at
loggerheads with Bezier and Orsini over your case.’
‘And still he sent you?’
‘Let me be direct, Gregor. I think it will help. Lord Rorken, may his
fortunes multiply in the face of the God-Emperor, sent me to assist you in
the unmasking and destruction of the heretic Quixos. But if, along the way,
I should discover anything that confirmed the generally-believed allegations
of your own heresy...’
‘What?’
‘I think you understand.’
‘You’re his hatchet man. You’ll help me... but if I cross the line in your
eyes, Rorken has sanctioned you to execute me.’
He raised his glass. ‘I think we know where we stand,’ We did. Now it
made much more sense that Rorken had sent so senior an agent to my side.
I said nothing. Ricci smiled and went back inside.
WE SAT DOWN around the table again and debated some more. I found
most of the questions – especially those from Voke and Ricci – wilfully
small-minded.
At last, after another hour, Grumman voiced a pertinent query.
‘Supposing we agree to this. Agree that Eisenhorn is wrongly charged
and that Quixos deserves our sternest censure... how do we do that? Do we
know where Quixos is?’
‘Yes,’ I said, though I didn’t know the answer myself. My people had
enjoyed the best part of two years to do their work, many dozens of agents
sifting data from hundreds of worlds.
Unbidden, Bequin stepped forward and took a seat with us at the table.
‘About three months ago, our research discerned a pattern in the data
surrounding the near-mythical life of Quixos. And that pattern centred on
Maginor.’
‘Capital of the Niaides sub-sector, Viceroy sector, Ultima segmentum,’
announced Voke.
‘Your astronomical knowledge is humbling, sir,’ Bequin said smoothly.
She handed out data-slates.
‘As you can see from the file of data marked “alpha”, Quixos certainly
visited Maginor almost two hundred years ago, and became involved with a
cartel of trade interests and noble families known as the Mystic Path. The
Path was a network which was already utilising prohibited and forbidden
lore and technologies. Quixos should have closed them down and burned
them. It is clear he did not. Instead, he fed and supported them. He nurtured
them until they became a power base for his invisible empire of dark belief.
No longer a cartel but a cult. A cult of Quixos.’
‘Why do we think he’s still there?’ asked Ricci.
‘We think he’s made his hidden fastness there, sir,’ said Bequin. ‘The
reaches of the Mystic Path now spread throughout the segmentum and
beyond. Maginor is its heart. In 239.M41, Inquisitor Lugenbrau and a
warrior band numbering some sixty individuals disappeared on Maginor.
No trace of them was ever found, though Interrogator Inshabel was able
to... ah... recover an incomplete verbal transcript of a pict-recording
apparently made during Lugenbrau’s raid.’
I speed-read the transcript. It was harrowing. ‘You got this from Elvara
Cardinal, Inshabel?’ I asked.
Inshabel was at the back of the room. He stepped forward, blushing. ‘Not
directly, sir. It actually came from the inquisitorial data-library on Fibos
Secundus. How is a damn good story, but it’s probably wasting valuable
time to repeat it just now.’
Inshabel was right, as I have already said. It was a damn good story, and I
enjoyed it when he told it to me later. I urge you to access it.
‘We believe Lugenbrau was hunting Quixos, although he may not have
known it,’ continued Bequin. ‘He and his entire band were wiped out by
Quixos’s forces.’
‘Lugenbrau,’ murmured Voke, setting his slate down and looking off into
space. ‘I never met him, but he was a trusted pupil of my late comrade,
Inquisitor Pavel Uet. When Lugenbrau went missing, Uet took it hard. The
loss shortened his life.’
Voke looked at me with his rheumy eyes. ‘If I wasn’t decided before,
Eisenhorn, I am now. Quixos must pay.’
‘I agree,’ said Endor, tossing his slate onto the table and looking grim.
‘At the very least, the Inquisition demands vengeance for this.’
‘Maginor, then?’ Grumman asked.
‘It’s still his base of operations, sir, we are sure of that,’ said Bequin.
‘And until a week ago, we were all set to prepare for a strike against
Maginor. Then we received this.’ She held up a astropathic transcript.
‘I will read it, if I may.’ She carefully put on her half-moon glasses. They
suited her, but I knew her vanity made her hate them. It said a lot about the
situation that she was willing to wear them in front of these men.
‘It begins... “Gregor, my friend. I have been kept up to date with the data
concerning your quarry. It gives me something to do, these winter
afternoons. I agree that Maginor may be the seat of the evil, and certainly
requires the attention of the Inquisition. But, if you’ll pardon me, I suggest
that Maginor be left to the Ordos Niaides. Using pointers Aemos gave me, I
have assessed the following. My full findings are on the data-files attached
below, but in short, I think you should be looking at Farness Beta. Quixos’s
fascination with the pylons of Cadia made me think, you see.
‘“See below, that I have traced massive stonecutting orders to the limit-
world of Serebos, which lies galactically south of Terra. The masonic guilds
of Serebos are famously secretive about their contracts. They provide an
inert, obsidian-like black glass-stone called serebite, a beautiful substance
that is in high demand right across the Imperium. Serebite is, as far as
reckoning goes, as close to the material used on Cadia for the pylons as it is
possible to get. As I have said, the masonic guilds are close about their
contracts, but there is little hiding the transportation of a massive copy of
one of those pylons by shipping guild bulk-lifter. Three-quarters of a
kilometre long and a quarter square! Quixos has ordered the manufacture of
a perfect copy of the Cadian pylons, and has had it shipped to Farness
Beta.”’
Bequin paused and looked up at us.
‘“If you’ve ever trusted my advice, trust this now,”’ she continued.
‘“Quixos is on Farness. And if you’re going to stop him, it must be now.
Your devoted friend and pupil. Gideon.”’
Gideon. Gideon Ravenor. Crippled as he was, he had found this insight,
which totally altered our plan of attack. I was speechless. I felt almost
tearful.
‘There is a postscript,’ said Bequin. ‘He writes, “The daemonhosts will
be your foullest problem. I know you are prepared, but I send you these.
One for each of the twenty you have summoned.”’
Bequin took off her half-moon glasses and rose. Nayl brought in a crate
and set it down on the table. Inside were twenty scrolls of daemonic
protection, each sealed inside a blessed tube of green marble, and twenty
consecrated gold amulets of the God-Emperor as a skeletal relic. It was so
typical of Ravenor to attend to such details. Nayl handed them out, a heavy
scroll tube and an amulet to each of us.
‘I’m convinced,’ Ricci said, getting to his feet and hanging the amulet
around his neck so that it hung between the purity seals of his armour.
‘I am glad. Grumman?’
‘I’m with you,’ said the Cadian.
‘A toast,’ I said, raising my glass. ‘To this cell of five. And to the others
who have assisted in getting us this far,’ Bequin, Aemos, Nayl, Fischig and
Inshabel also saluted with their glasses.
‘To Farness Beta. To the end of Quixos.’
The five inquisitors in the drafty keep clinked glasses.
‘Farness Beta,’ said Ricci. ‘Remind me. Where is that?’
‘In the throat of the Cadian Gate,’ said Grumman. ‘Right on the edge of
the Eye of Terror.’
TWENTY-TWO
Farness Beta.
Cherubael and Prophaniti.
Quixos.
IT WAS EARLY in 343.M41 before we reached Farness Beta. By then, war
was bifurcating the Cadia sub-sector, and armies of sheer horror were
spewing out of the Eye of Terror. Like a whirlpool of fire, the Eye
dominated the skies of most gate-worlds, distended and angry, flaring more
savagely than at any time in living memory. Every flash and pulse of its
maelstrom was another warp hole opening, another flotilla of death
unleashed. That spring was known as the Staunch Holding of the Cadian
Gate, and entered the history books, as every scholar knows.
During the first months of 343, the Cadians saw off the greatest incursion
of Chaos suffered in three hundred years.
It was almost as if the Archenemy knew something.
THE ESSENE BROUGHT me to Farness champing and eager to get on. We
were escorted through the immaterium by two other ships: Ricci’s stately
steeple of a cruiser and Voke’s ancient porcupine of a warship. Endor and
Grumman, along with their retinue bands, travelled aboard the Essene with
me. It had been a long time since the Essene had carried so many people.
The Imperial Navy taskforce, a ten-ship squadron seconded from
Battlefleet Scarus for special operations under the remit of the Battlefleet
Disciplinary Detachment, was waiting for us.
THE TASKFORCE HAD already been on station for a fortnight, and its
reconnaissance and intelligence operations had comprehensively prepared
the ground for us.
‘We have a confirmed location for Pariah,’ Lord Procurator Olm
Madorthene told me over a vox-pict link from his own ship.
Pariah was the operational word we had set for Quixos. ‘Or at least his
seat of activity, anyway. I’m relaying the data to you now. Site A is what
you’re looking for.’
I turned from my seat on the Essene’s elegant bridge and Maxilla nodded
to one of his beautiful servitors. The map display flashed up on the
secondary screen of my console.
‘I have it,’ I said, turning back to look at Madorthene’s slightly fuzzy
image on the main bridge display.
‘It’s a table mountain called Ferell Sidor, literally the “altar of the sun”,
up in one of the remote northern wards of Hengav province. Provincial
government has declared the whole ward a Sacred Territory because the
area is riddled with Second Dynasty tholos tombs. Access is supposed to be
restricted to the Ecclesiarchy, the Farnessi royal families and sanctioned
archaeologists. We believe Pariah obtained licenses to excavate on Ferell
Sidor about six years ago, in the guise of an archaeological mission from
the Universitariate of Avellorn. The local authorities are supposed to
monitor such missions, but frankly they have no idea what he’s up to there.
If you look at the detail map...’
‘Yes, got it.’
‘You can see the extent of the workings. Pariah’s constructed a small
town up there, alongside the pit.’
‘The excavation is considerable...’
‘We think that’s where he’s buried or sited this facsimile pylon. It’s
difficult to get a clear view. We didn’t want to get too close and tip him off.’
I rose from my bridge throne and stood facing the enormous image of the
lord procurator’s face. ‘You’re set?’
‘Absolutely. You have a copy of my assault strategy there. Make any
amendments you like.’
There was no need. Madorthene’s plan was economical and efficient.
Officially, this was an operation by the Battlefleet Disciplinary Detachment,
prosecuting leads gathered during the inquest into the Thracian Atrocity.
Lord Procurator Madorthene had entered into a co-operative pact with
Commodus Voke to execute the plan. In reality, his pact was secretly with
me. Olm was the only non-inquisitor I had written to.
We encrypted the call-signs and command authorities for the operation,
agreed the zero-hour, and wished each other luck.
‘The Emperor protects, Gregor,’ he said.
‘I hope so, Olm,’ I replied.
TWO HOURS BEFORE sunrise the next day, five hundred Imperial Guard
from the Fifty-First Thracian moved in towards Ferell Sidor – Site A – from
covert forward assembly points in the surrounding hills where they had
been dropped by troop ships the day before. They advanced, silently, in
three prongs, the first securing the single trackway that gave land-vehicle
access to the table mountain. When all three were in position, we woke
Ferell Sidor up.
The frigates Zhikov and Fury of Spatian bombarded the mountain for six
minutes, raising a ball of fire that lit the landscape as if the sun had come up
early. In its afterglow, thirty Marauder bombers overflew Site A at low level
and delivered thirty thousand kilos of high explosives.
Another false dawn.
Despite this punishing overture, when the ground troops went in eight
minutes after the last bomb, resistance was furious. Madorthene had feared
that the best part of Quixos’s strength lay underground, wormed inside the
mountain, resistant to the worst aerial assaults.
In the blazing ruins of the excavation township, the Thracian troops
found themselves engaging fanatical and well-armed cultists. Most wore the
insignia and colours of the Mystic Path. Many were mutants. Initial reports
estimated over eight hundred enemy warriors. Madorthene committed the
taskforce reserve: another seven hundred Thracian assault soldiers.
BY THEN, WE were already deploying in the second wave. Medea landed
Inshabel and myself on the edge of the strike zone, along with Endor and
his two weapon-servitors. Ricci’s shielded pinnace settled in close by,
kicking up dust and delivering him and Commodus Voke, along with a
bodyguard of twenty inquisitorial troops. Grumman, using a Navy drop-
ship loaned by Madorthene, was the last to make groundfall, but the first to
engage. Grumman’s ten-man squad were all ex-Kasrkin specialists.
As we hurried forward through the backwashing smoke, our landing
ships rising back into the pre-dawn sky behind us, there was a tremor and a
palpable upwelling of psychic force. Frighteningly powerful waves of
psyker power erupted from the epicentre of Site A, killing over thirty of the
forward troops... and then suddenly cut off.
We had all anticipated Quixos would have vast psychic defences – he
had, after all, been collecting psykers like Esarhaddon – and it seemed
likely that active psychic assaults would be a key element of his resistance,
perhaps even more significant than his daemonhosts. I had taken no
chances.
In two groups, my entire Distaff of untouchables, some fifty individuals
all told, had moved in alongside the first ground-troop advances. Bequin,
guarded by Nayl and twelve of my warrior staff, led one group, and Thula
Surskova, protected by Fischig and a dozen more fighters, led the other.
The Distaff had never been used on such a scale before, but it proved to
be the weapon I had always suspected. The blankness they generated
contained and negated the engulfing psychic storm, effectively bottling it
inside Site A and preventing it from threatening our closing forces.
WITH INSHABEL, I moved underground, down the rock-cut steps into the
inner sectors of Site A. For almost an hour we fought our way through the
smoked-swathed surface structures, a metre at a time. Now, with the sun
rising, we found our first access point to the lower levels: a stairwell
exposed by a bomb crater.
The place was strewn with smouldering debris and a few unidentifiable
bodies. In places, power cables were hanging, sparking, from the rockcrete
roof. We both wore motion trackers, and switched left and right, gunning
down cultists as they appeared. My boltgun was already running short of
shells, and Inshabel was on to his second-to-last power cell. The level of
resistance was unbelievable.
At a junction in the seemingly random jumble of tunnels, we encountered
Endor. He had a couple of Thracian troopers and an Inquisition guardsman
with him, but he’d lost both of his slow-moving attack-servitors. I knew
what he was thinking just by the look in his eyes. We had come in strong
and confident, but perhaps not strong enough. I thought I had anticipated
the worst Quixos could throw against us. Maybe I had underestimated him
after all.
Ferocious bursts of shooting alerted us to a firefight in a larger chamber
to the left. We arrived in time to meet four wounded, terrified Thracian
troopers fleeing towards us.
‘Back! Go back!’ they were screaming.
I pushed past them.
The chamber beyond was massive and half-filled with veiling smoke.
Green, unnatural flames were licking up the walls. At the far end, the
already huge chamber seemed to open out into something much, much
vaster.
But that was not what occupied my eyes.
Surrounded by over fifty bodies, most of them Imperial Guards,
Commodus Voke was standing his ground against Prophaniti.
The old inquisitor was shuddering, his robes stiffening with psychic ice.
Corposant fire glowed from his mouth and eyes. The daemonhost, its cruel
features just recognisable as a distortion of poor, lost Husmaan’s face,
hovered in front of Voke, struggling at an invisible barrier of telekinetic
wrath.
We ran forward, abruptly drawing fire from cultists spreading into the
chamber from the right. The Thracian beside me bucked and twitched as he
was hit twice, and Inshabel cursed as he was winged.
Endor urged the remaining men to advance on his lead, and took the fight
to the cultists, his laspistol blazing and his chainblade swinging.
Voke was close to breaking. I could see him wavering under the immense
pressure.
I bolstered my boltgun and stumbled across the bodies and debris to aid
him, praying that my runestaff would do what it was supposed to.
And a dizzying blast of white light and scourging heat blew me back
through the air.
I TRIED TO get up, half-realising that I had been blown clean out of the
chamber, through a flakboard partition into some kind of dank chute.
Invisible forces lifted me to my feet. Light bathed me.
Cherubael hovered before me.
‘Gregor,’ it said. ‘You’ve come so far. I knew you had it in you.’
I held the runestaff in front of me. The green marble scroll of daemonic
protection that Ravenor had sent had already been reduced to a shattered
remnant by the force of Cherubael’s opening attack.
‘I’ve waited for this moment for such a long time,’ said the daemonhost.
‘Remember on Eechan I said you’d have to make things up to me? Well,
this is the time. Now. This is the moment that everything’s been about. The
one I have seen coming since our paths first crossed. Destinies... our
destinies, intertwined, remember that?’
‘How could I forget?’ I spat. ‘You claim to have been using me all along!
Guiding me! Even protecting me! I watched you kill Lyko on Eechan! So
that I would live... for this moment? Why?’
Cherubael smiled. ‘When the warp is in you as it is in me, you see time
from all angles. You see what will be and what will come, what someone
here now will do in a century or two, what someone there has done a
thousand years in the past. You see the possibilities.’
‘Riddles! That’s all you ever speak!’
‘No more riddles, Eisenhorn. From the moment I first met you, I saw you
were the only one, the only one with the tenacity, the skill and the
opportunity to give me what I want. What I want most of all. I saw that if I
kept you safe, you would come and give me that most precious thing here,
on this world, at this hour.’
‘I would never help a daemon like you!’
Cherubael grinned, blank-eyed and utterly serious. ‘Then destroy me, if
you can.’
It lunged. I raised the runestaff and channelled my will down through the
psi-conductive pole into the lodestone. The carved fragment of the Lith
blazed with blue light.
PONTIUS GLAW KNEW a thing or two about daemonhosts. Their greatest
weakness was the strength of the will that had bound them as slaves. The
runestaff, so carefully prepared and constructed, so painstakingly etched
with the ancient symbols of control, was a lever to topple that binding will
by amplifying my own to levels that would overwhelm it.
For a brief moment, I felt how it must feel to be an alpha-plus psyker.
The scintillating spear of energy that shot from the lode-stone struck
Cherubael in the chest.
The daemonhost smiled for a second, and then its flesh-vessel ruptured
open, billowing a storm of Chaos-fire in all directions. I had cast it out of its
binding and banished it back into the warp.
And in the moment as my amplified mind overmastered his, I saw the
years of enslavement it had endured at Quixos’s hands, the torments of its
binding, the great, forbidden text of the Malus Codicium whose arcane
knowledge Quixos had used to create his daemonhosts.
And I realised that I had given Cherubael exactly what it wanted after all.
Freedom.
I STUMBLED BACK into the main chamber. By then, Voke, whose
resistance to Prophaniti had been astonishing, was dead.
I remembered Voke’s words after the atrocity on Thracian: ‘I will make
amends. I will not rest until every one of these wretches is destroyed, and
order restored. And then I will not rest until I find who and what was
behind it.’
He could rest now. That work was done.
The daemonhost was casting the valiant old man’s empty husk of a body
aside and gliding towards Endor and Inshabel, who were both already on
their knees in agony. Cyan flames washed from Prophaniti’s fingertips and
wrapped my two friends in tight, burning psychic shackles. They were
trapped morsels for it to feed off at its leisure.
Prophaniti froze when I appeared, instinctively knowing I posed a more
serious threat. The Lith-stone was still smoking with blood-red light.
The daemonhost surged through the air at me, teeth bared, arms spread,
incandescent with light, baying my name. It was like facing the attack run
of a supersonic warcraft firing all guns. I know so. It is my misfortune to
have experienced that too.
Prophaniti whooped with glee.
‘At Kasr Geth, you told me to make my weapons sounder next time,
monster!’ I howled, and impaled its charging form on the steel pole of the
runestaff. ‘Is this sound enough?’
Prophaniti screamed and exploded, blowing me off my feet. I don’t think
I banished it. I think I obliterated its essence forever.
The runestaff was, miraculously, unscathed, and lay amid the rubble. But
Prophaniti’s dissipating being had made it white hot from base to cap, and I
could not pick it up again.
I ran across to Titus Endor and Inshabel, both of whom lolled weakly on
the floor.
Inshabel was dazed but intact. Endor had daemon gashes across his chest
and neck. He looked up at me blearily.
‘You got them both, Gregor...’
‘I pray there are no more,’ I replied, trying to staunch his bleeding. His
rosette slid out of his coat pocket and I leaned to pick it up.
The inquisitorial symbol was decorated with the ornate crest of the Ordo
Malleus.
‘Malleus?’ I hissed.
‘No...’
‘When did you transfer, Endor? Damn you, when did you change ordos?’
‘They forced me...’ he wheezed, ‘Osma forced me! When he had me on
Messina... there were certain matters from a case a few years ago. He’d got
his hands on them somehow... He... he promised I would burn if I didn’t
help him get to you.’
‘What matters?’
‘Nothing! Nothing, Gregor, I swear! But he had Bezel’s backing! He
could have made anything look heretical! I transferred orders to stop him
breaking me. He said I would be rewarded, advanced. He said Ordo
Malleus was a better prospect for me.’
‘But you were to keep an eye on me?’
‘I told him nothing! I never sold you out. I did just enough to keep Osma
satisfied.’
‘Like coming here. No wonder you hid your rosette. He wanted you to
take me down, didn’t he?’
Endor was silent. Inshabel looked on in stark disbelief.
‘I... I was to go along with this operation, in the hope that it might be
successful. Orsini’s under no illusions that Quixos is a menace, and this was
an expedient way, perhaps, of eliminating him. If you were still... alive at
the end of it, I was told to arrest you on the carta charges. Or, if you
resisted...’
‘Get him up to ground level,’ I told Inshabel quietly. ‘Find him a medic.
Don’t let him out of your sight.’
‘Yes sir!’
‘Gregor!’ Endor gasped as Inshabel lifted him. ‘By the God-Emperor, I
never meant—’
‘Get him out of here!’ I growled.
THE ASSAULT ON Ferell Sidor was three hours old when Grumman, Ricci
and I entered the undervault of the excavation pit. Madorthene’s forces
were still locked in a monumental struggle with the renegade’s warriors
throughout the warren of tunnels and chambers in the table mountain.
Ricci was weak from a blade wound, and all of his bodyguards were
dead. Grumman had just two Kasrkin left with him, both of them armed
with lasrifles.
The vast undervault was an excavated pit almost a kilometre deep, open
to the sky. The serebite copy of the Radian pylon rested in the base of it,
surrounded by adamantite scaffolding. Gibbet cages, hundreds of them,
hung from the scaffolding on chains. In each one, trapped and helpless, was
a human body.
They were Quixos’s carefully collected arsenal of rogue psykers, secretly
acquired from all over the Imperium. It must have taken him decades to
accumulate so many. One of them, I had no doubt, was Esarhaddon
‘What is he doing?’ Ricci asked, a touch of awe in his voice.
‘Something we have to stop,’ said Grumman, with a direct simplicity I
appreciated. It was the only answer any of us needed.
We had been living at our nerve ends since the assault began, and were
wired with combat sharpness. Even so, despite our combined experience
and skill, what happened next took us all totally by surprise.
One moment there was nothing. The next, a robed, armoured form was in
amongst us, moving so fast it was simply a blur.
So fast. So accursedly fast.
Instantly, Ricci was split open down the length of his spine. As he was
still in the process of falling on his face, choking on his own blood, one of
the Kasrkin was severed at the waist, and toppled in halves, his gun firing
spasmodically. The other Kasrkin folded up around the impaling thrust of a
long, dark blade, spontaneously combusting from the belly out.
Grumman pushed me out of the way as the devastating blur turned again,
and fired his laspistol at it three times. Snapping round faster than my eyes
could follow, the long, dark blade the blur was wielding deflected each
crackling shot.
Grumman’s head left his shoulders.
Quixos, the arch-heretic, the renegade, the unforgivable radical, whirled
on me before Grumman’s butchered body had even started to slump.
I had one fleeting glimpse of the long daemonsword, Kharnagar. It was
gnarled and knotted and thick with abominable runes and irregular clawlike
serrations.
That’s all I saw as it came whistling towards my face.
TWENTY-THREE
The heretic.
Afterwards.
A BARE HAND’s breadth from my head, the blood-red blade came to a
dead stop, blocked by the gleaming steel of Barbarisater.
Time seemed to stand still for a heartbeat. We faced each other, our
blades locked together. Quixos had been a speed-distorted phantom until
our swords had struck. Now he was frozen, glaring between the crossed
blades at me.
The renegade’s armour was ragged and filthy, and ornate with warp-
signs. His inquisitorial rosette was displayed, incongruously, on his right
shoulder guard. It revolted me to see it worn amongst such corruption.
His ancient face was a misshapen, pustular horror. Rudimentary antlers
bulged from his brow. His skin was dark like granite. Wheezing augmetic
cables and implants bulged at his throat and under the dirty head-cloth he
wore. His eyes were shining balls of blood.
In honesty, he was a disappointing little monster compared to the notion
of him that had built up in my mind. But there was no denying his inhuman
strength and speed.
Eisenhorn, he said. It was psychic. His twisted mouth didn’t open.
Barbarisater felt him move before I did. It lurched in my hands. In the
time it takes to draw a breath, we had exchanged a flurry of twenty or more
blows. The talon-edged blade of Kharnager rang dully off the Carthaen
steel. Barbarisater’s pentagrammatic runes flashed and flared with
discharging energy. Kharnager groaned softly.
Heretic! Slave of Chaos! his raw, broken mind-voice railed in my brain.
You speak of yourself! I returned. Our blades continued to ring off one
another, hunting for a gap, mutually denied.
Why would you try to end my work here if you were not a minion of the
warp?
Your work? This thing?
We broke, and then came in again, blades striking so fast the noise
became one long ringing tone. I barely made an ulsar in time to stop one of
his rapid down-stabs. He blocked my response of a tahn wyla, and the uru
arav that I followed it with.
This is just the test, the prototype. Once the trials with it are conducted,
then my work will flower!
You carve up a mountain... for a prototype? A prototype of what?
The pylons of Cadia pacify the warp, he spat. By amplifying them using
extreme-level psykers, they could be made into a weapon. A weapon to
destroy the warp! A weapon to collapse the Eye of Terror in upon itself!
He was raving, insane. What patches of truth or sane notions might lurk
in his words, I had no idea. There was no way to distinguish them from his
lunatic fancy. All I knew was that a pylon, psychically super-charged, might
do all manner of things, but its side-effects would be catastrophic. It could
lay waste to the continent, the planet.
I think, and here lay the true horror of it, I think Quixos knew that. I think
he considered that to be an acceptable price to pay, just as he had
considered the atrocity on Thracian a necessary cost to obtain a psyker of
such peerless quality as Esarhaddon. What other abominations had he
caused in acquiring the others?
As Grumman had said, just before his death, this simply had to be
stopped.
I looked at his face.
This was where radicalism led. This was the true face of one who had
reached the place and crossed the line. This was the obscene reality behind
Pontius Glaw’s jaunty glorifications of Chaos.
We rained blows at each other, drawing sparks and little curls of vapour
from the blade edges. I tried a low swing, but he leapt over it, and alternated
a series of scissoring blows that drove me backwards across the dusty
ground. I thought my feet would slip. He was a whirlwind.
I saw my moment. Barbarisater saw it too. A slight underswing on his
blade return that opened a gap for a sar aht uht, a slice to the heart, just for
a microsecond.
I thrust in, putting all my will into the blade. Somehow, dazzlingly, he
still managed to turn Kharnager and block me.
Barbarisater struck the daemonsword and broke in half.
And it was the ultimate failure of the ancient Carthaen blade that gave me
victory. If it had stayed intact, the block would have stopped it and the fight
would have continued.
Breaking around Quixos’s sword-edge, the truncated half of Barbarisater
in my hand continued on, with all my mustered force behind it, until the
broken end plunged through his cloak, his body armour, his augmetic
implants and ran him through the torso.
The ewl caer.
It took almost equal force to break the suction of his flesh around the
blade and rip it out.
Quixos staggered backwards, polluted blood spurting from the wound,
his augmetics shorting out and exploding.
Then he fell to the dusty floor of the undervault, and became dust
himself, until there was nothing left but rotting augmetic devices and empty
armour twisted under his lank cape.
Heretic! his mind screeched out as he died.
Coming from him, the word felt like a compliment.
SITE A WAS dismantled and destroyed by the taskforce, and the faux
pylon smashed by sustained orbital fire. Quixos’s psykers, and his surviving
servants, were imprisoned, and then turned over to the Black Ships of the
Inquisition, six of which arrived a few days later, once we had published
news of our achievement. Most of the captives were deemed too dangerous
or too tainted to keep, even under the closest guard, and were executed.
Esarhaddon was one of those.
Many precious texts and artifacts were recovered from Site A, and many
more that were diabolic and abominable. He had accumulated a vast
resource of esoteric material, and there was supposed to be a great deal
more at his fastness on distant Maginor. A further purge would reveal the
truth of that.
As the report has it, no trace was ever found of the Malus Codicium, the
foul grimoire on which his power had ultimately been based.
BY THE TIME I had returned to Gudrun with my followers and allies, the
carta issued against me had been abolished. None of Osma’s allegations
could stand up in the face of the evidence gathered at Farness, or the many
statements collected by the Inquisition, statements pleading my innocence
made by such individuals as Lord Procurator Madorthene, Inquisitor
General Neve, Interrogator Inshabel and, God-Emperor help him, Titus
Endor.
I was never offered any sort of official apology, not by Grandmaster
Orsini, or by Bezier, and certainly not by Osma. His career didn’t suffer one
bit. Twenty years later, he was elected Master of the Ordo Malleus Helican
after Bezier’s sudden, unexpected death.
Grumman’s remains, and the remains of his Kasrkin, were buried in one
of the lonely field-grave plots on Cadia, to be remembered as long as the
Law of Decipherability allowed. Ricci had a library named after him on his
home world of Hesperus. Voke was buried with full honours at the Thorian
Sacristy adjoining the Great Cathedral of the Ministorum on Thracian
Primaris. A small brass plaque commemorating the achievements of his
long and dedicated career remains on the sacristy wall to this day.
He and I had never been friends, but I own that in the years after he was
gone, I missed his caustic manner from time to time.
EPILOGUE
Winter, 345.M41.
THE VOICE WAS like the sound of some eternal glacier – slow, old, cold,
heavy.
It asked simply, ‘Why?’
‘Because I can.’
The silence lasted for a long time. The thousand candle flames flickered
and rippled the carefully inscribed stone walls with echoes of their moving
glow.
‘Why? Why... have you done this... this wretched thing to me?’
‘Because I have power over you where once you had power over me.
You used me. You orchestrated my life. You moved me like a regicide piece
to the place where I best served your desires. Now, that is reversed.’
It thrashed against its chains and shackles, but it was still too weak from
the ordeals of the snaring, the entrapment.
‘Damn you...’ it whispered, falling limp.
‘Understand me. I said I would never help a thing like you, but you
tricked me into doing so and almost got away with it. That’s why I have
done this. That’s why I have expended the considerable time and effort
involved in raising you, snaring you and binding you. This is a lesson. I will
never, ever allow my actions or my life to benefit the Archenemy. You said
that from the outset, you knew I was the one who would free you from
Quixos’s service. It’s a shame for you that you failed to see what I might do
to you instead.’
‘Damn you!’ the voice was louder.
‘There will be a time, Cherubael, daemon-thing, when you will wish with
all your putrid soul to be Quixos’s plaything again.’
Cherubael threw itself at me as far as it could before the chains went taut
and snapped it back. Its scream of rage and malice shook the cell and blew
every last one of the candles out.
I sealed the vacuum hatch, engaged the warp dampers and the void
shield, and turned the thirteen locks one by one.
From far away in the house, Jarat was ringing the bell for dinner. I was
bone-weary from my exertions, but food and wine and good company
would refresh me.
I CLIMBED THE screwstair from the deep basement stronghold, code-
locked the door and wandered to my study. Outside, the snows had come
early to Gudrun. Light flakes were blowing in through the twilight, across
the woods and paddocks, and settling across the lawns of my estate.
In the study, I returned the items I had been carrying to their places. I put
the bottles of chrism back on the shelf, and the ritual athame, mirror and
lamens in the casket. The Imperial amulet went back on its velvet pad in the
locking draw, and I slid the tube-scrolls back into their catalogue rack.
Then I placed the runestaff on its hooks in the lit alcove above the glass
case containing the broken pieces of proud Barbarisater.
Finally, I opened the void safe in the floor behind my bureau, and gently
laid the Malus Codicium inside.
Jarat was ringing the bell again.
I sealed the safe and went down to dinner.
BACKCLOTH FOR A CROWN
ADDITIONAL
LORD FROIGRE, MUCH to everyone’s dismay including, I’m sure, his own,
was dead.
It was a dry, summer morning in 355.M41 and I was taking breakfast
with Alizebeth Bequin on the terrace of Spaeton House when I received the
news. The sky was a blurry blue, the colour of Sameterware porcelain, and
down in the bay the water was a pale lilac, shot through with glittering frills
of silver. Sand doves warbled from the drowsy shade of the estate orchards.
Jubal Kircher, my craggy, dependable chief of household security, came
out into the day’s heat from the garden room, apologised courteously for
interrupting our private meal, and handed me a folded square of thin
transmission paper.
‘Trouble?’ asked Bequin, pushing aside her dish of ploin crepes.
‘Froigre’s dead,’ I replied, studying the missive.
‘Froigre who?’
‘Lord Froigre of House Froigre.’
‘You knew him?’
‘Very well. I would count him as a friend. Well, how very miserable.
Dead at eighty-two. That’s no age.’
‘Was he ill?’ Bequin asked.
‘No. Aen Froigre was, if anything, maddeningly robust and healthy. Not
a scrap of augmetics about him. You know the sort.’ I made this remark
pointedly. My career had not been kind to my body. I had been repaired,
rebuilt, augmented and generally sewn back together more times than I
cared to remember. I was a walking testimonial to Imperial Medicae
reconstruction surgery. Alizebeth, on the other hand, still looked like a
woman in her prime, a beautiful woman at that, and only the barest
minimum of juvenat work had preserved her so.
‘According to this, he died following a seizure at his home last night. His
family are conducting thorough investigations, of course, but...’ I drummed
my fingers on the tabletop.
‘Foul play?’
‘He was an influential man.’
‘Such men have enemies.’
‘And friends,’ I said. I handed her the communiqué. ‘That’s why his
widow has requested my assistance.’
But for my friendship with Aen, I’d have turned the matter down.
Alizebeth had only just arrived on Gudrun after an absence of almost
eighteen months, and would be gone again in a week, so I had resolved to
spend as much time with her as possible. The operational demands of the
Distaff, based on Messina, kept her away from my side far more than I
would have liked.
But this was important, and Lady Froigre’s plea too distraught to ignore.
‘I’ll come with you,’ Alizebeth suggested. ‘I feel like a jaunt in the
country,’ She called for a staff car to be brought round from the stable block
and we were on our way in under an hour.
FELIPPE GABON, ONE of Kircher’s security detail, acted as our driver. He
guided the car up from Spaeton on a whisper of thrust and laid in a course
for Menizerre. Soon we were cruising southwest over the forest tracts and
the verdant cultivated belt outside Dorsay and leaving the Insume headland
behind.
In the comfortable, climate-controlled rear cabin of the staff car, I told
Alizebeth about Froigre.
‘There have been Froigres on Gudrun since the days of the first colonies.
Their house is one of the Twenty-six Venerables, that is to say one of the
twenty-six original noble fiefs, and as such has an hereditary seat in the
Upper Legislature of the planetary government. Other, newer houses have
considerably more power and land these days, but nothing can quite eclipse
the prestige of the Venerables. Houses like Froigre, Sangral, Meissian. And
Glaw.’
She smiled impishly at my inclusion of that last name.
‘So... power, land, prestige... a honeytrap for rivals and enemies. Did
your friend have any?’
I shrugged. I’d brought with me several dataslates Psullus had looked out
for me from the library. They contained heraldic ledgers, family histories,
biographies and memoirs. And very little that seemed pertinent.
‘House Froigre vied with House Athensae and House Brudish in the early
years of Gudrun, but that’s literally ancient history. Besides, House Brudish
became extinct after another feud with House Pariti eight hundred years
ago. Aen’s grandfather famously clashed with Lord Sangral and the then
Governor Lord Dougray over the introduction of Founding Levy in the one-
nineties, but that was just political, though Dougray never forgave him and
later snubbed him by making Richtien chancellor. In recent times, House
Froigre has been very much a quiet, solid, traditional seat in the Legislature.
No feuds, that I know of. In fact, there hasn’t been an interhouse war on
Gudrun for seven generations.’
‘They all play nicely together, these days, do they?’ she asked.
‘Pretty much. One of the things I like about Gudrun is that it is so
damned civilised.’
‘Too damned civilised,’ she admonished. ‘One day, Gregor, one day this
place will lull you into such a deep sense of tranquil seclusion that you’ll be
caught with your pants down.’
‘I hardly think so. It’s not complacency, before you jump down my
throat. Gudrun Spaeton House itself is just a safe place. A sanctuary, given
my line of work.’
‘Your friend’s still dead,’ she reminded me.
I sat back. ‘He liked to live well. Good food, fine wines. He could drink
Nayl under the table.’
‘No!’
‘I’m not joking. Five years ago, at the wedding of Aen’s daughter. I was
invited and I took Harlon along as... as I don’t know what, actually. You
weren’t around and I didn’t want to go alone. Harlon started bending his
lordship’s ear with tales of bounty hunting and the last I saw of them they
were sprinting their way down their fourth bottle of anise at five in the
morning. Aen was up at nine the next day to see his daughter off. Nayl was
still asleep at nine the following day.’
She grinned. ‘So a life of great appetites may have just caught up with
him?’
‘Perhaps. Though you’d think that would have shown up on the medicae
mortus’s report.’
‘So you do suspect foul play?’
‘I can’t shake that idea.’
I was silent for a few minutes, and Alizebeth scrolled her way through
several of the slates.
‘House Froigre’s main income was from mercantile dealings. They hold a
twelve point stock in Brade ent Cie and a fifteen per cent share in Helican
SubSid Shipping. What about trade rivals?’
‘We’d have to expand our scope offplanet. I suppose assassination is
possible, but that’s a strange way to hit back at a trade rival. I’ll have to
examine their records. If we can turn up signs of a clandestine trade fight,
then maybe assassination is the answer.’
‘Your friend spoke out against the Ophidian Campaign.’
‘So did his father. Neither believed it was appropriate to divert funds and
manpower into a war of reconquest in the subsector next door when there
was so much to put in order on the home front.’
‘I was just wondering...’ she said.
‘Wonder away, but I think that’s a dead end. The Ophidian War’s long
since over and done with and I don’t think anyone cares what Aen thought
about it.’
‘So have you got a theory?’
‘Only the obvious ones. None of them with any substantiating data. An
internecine feud, targeting Aen from inside the family. A murder driven by
some secret affair of the heart. A darker conspiracy that remains quite
invisible for now. Or...’
‘Or?’
‘Too much good living, in which case we’ll be home before nightfall.’
FROIGRE HALL, THE ancestral pile of the noble House Froigre, was a
splendid stack of ivyswathed ouslite and copper tiles overlooking the Vale
of Fiegg, ten kilometres south of Menizerre. Water meadows sloped back
from the river, becoming wildflower pastures that climbed through spinneys
of larch and fintle to hem the magnificent planned gardens of the house;
geometric designs of boxhedge, trim lawn, flowering beds and symmetrical
ponds. Beyond the sandy drive, darkened woods came right down to skirt
the back of the great hall, except for where a near-perfect sulleq lawn had
been laid. Aen and I had spent several diverting afternoons there, playing
against each other. A kilometre north of the house, the gnarled stone finger
of the Folly rose from the ascending woods.
‘Where to put down, sir?’ Gabon asked over the intercom.
‘On the drive in front of the portico, if you’d be so kind.’
‘What’s been going on here?’ Alizebeth asked as we came in lower. She
pointed. The lawn areas nearest to the hall were littered with scraps of
rubbish paper waste and glittery bits of foil. Some sections of grass were
flat and yellow as if compressed and starved of light.
Tiny stones, whipped up by our downwash, ticked off the car’s bodywork
as we settled in to land.
‘OH, MY DEAR Gregor!’ Lady Freyl Froigre almost fell into my arms. I
held her in a comforting embrace for a few patient moments as she sobbed
against my chest.
‘Forgive me!’ she said suddenly, pulling away and dabbing her eyes with
a black lace handkerchief. ‘This is all so very terrible. So very, very
terrible.’
‘My deepest sympathies for your loss, lady,’ I said, feeling awkward.
A houseman, his arm banded in black, had led us into a stateroom off the
main hall where Lady Froigre was waiting. The blinds were drawn, and
mourning tapers had been lit, filling the air with a feeble light and a sickly
perfume. Freyl Froigre was a stunning woman in her late sixties, her lush
red hair, almost flame-pink it was so bright, pulled back and pinned down
under a veil coif of jet scamiscoire. Her grief-gown was slate epinchire, the
sleeves ending in delicate interwoven gloves so that not one speck of her
flesh was uncovered.
I introduced Alizebeth, who murmured her condolences, and Lady
Froigre nodded. Then she suddenly looked flustered.
‘Oh, my. Where are my manners? I should have the staff bring
refreshments for you and’
‘Hush, lady,’ I said, taking her arm and walking her down the long room
into the soft shade of the shutters. ‘You have enough on your mind. Grief is
enough. Tell me what you know and I will do the rest.’
‘You’re a good man, sir. I knew I could trust you.’ She paused and waited
while her current wracks subsided.
‘Aen died just before midnight last night. A seizure. It was quick, the
physician said.’
‘What else did he say, lady?’
She drew a datawand from her sleeve and handed it to me. ‘It’s all here.’
I plucked out my slate and plugged it in. The display lit up with the stored
files.
Death by tremorous palpitations of the heart and mind. A dysfunction of
the spirit. According the medicae’s report, Aen Froigre had died because of
a spasm in his anima.
‘This means...’ I paused, ‘...nothing. Who is your physician?’
‘Genorus Notil of Menizerre. He has been the family medicae since the
time of Aen’s grandfather.’
‘His report is rather... nonspecific, lady. Could I present the body for a
further examination?’
‘I’ve already done that,’ she said softly. The surgeon at Menizerre
General who attended said the same. My husband died of terror.’
‘Terror?’
‘Yes, inquisitor. Now tell me that isn’t the work of the infernal powers?’
There had, she told me, been a celebration. A Grand Fete. Aen’s eldest
son, Rinton, had returned home two weeks before, having mustered out of
his service in the Imperial Guard. Rinton Froigre had been a captain in the
Fiftieth Gudrunite and seen six years’ service in the Ophidean subsector.
Such was his father’s delight on his return, a fete was called. A carnival
feast. Travelling players from all around the canton had attended, along
with troupes of musicians, acrobats, armies of stall holders, entertainers,
and hundreds of folk from the town. That explained the litter and faded
patches on the lawn. Tent pitches. The scars of marques.
‘Had he any enemies?’ I asked, pacing the shuttered room.
‘None that I know of.’
‘I would like to review his correspondence. Diaries too, if he kept them.’
‘I’ll see. I don’t believe he kept a diary, but our rubricator will have a list
of correspondence.’
On the top of the harpsichord was a framed portrait, a hololith of Aen
Froigre, smiling.
I picked it up and studied it.
‘The last portrait of him,’ she said. ‘Taken at the fete. My last connection
with him.’
‘Where did he die?’
‘The Folly,’ said Lady Froigre. ‘He died in the Folly.’
THE WOODS WERE damp and dark. Boughs creaked in the late afternoon
wind and odd birdsong thrilled from the shadows.
The Folly was a stone drum capped by a slate needle. Inside, it was bare
and terribly musty. Sand doves fluttered up in the roof spaces. Cobwebs
glazed the bare windows.
‘This is where I found him,’ said a voice from behind me.
I turned. Rinton Froigre stooped in under the doorframe. He was a well-
made boy of twenty-five, with his mother’s lush red hair. His eyes had a
curious, hooded aspect.
‘Rinton.’
‘Sir,’ he bowed slightly.
‘Was he dead when you found him?’
‘No, inquisitor. He was laughing and talking. He liked to come up here.
He loved the Folly. I came up to thank him for the fete that he had thrown
in my honour. We were talking together when suddenly he went into
convulsions. Just minutes later, before I could summon help, he was dead.’
I didn’t know Rinton Froigre well, though his service record was very
respectable, and I knew his father had been proud of him. Aen had never
mentioned any animosity from his son, but in any noble house there is
always the spectre of succession to consider. Rinton had been alone with his
father at the time of death. He was a seasoned soldier, undoubtedly no
stranger to the act of killing.
I kept an open mind literally. Even without any invasive mental probing,
it is possible for a psionic of my ability to sense surface thoughts. There
was no flavour of deceit about Rinton’s person, though I could feel
carefully contained loss, and the tingle of trepidation. Small wonder, I
considered. Uncommon are the citizens of the Imperium who do not
register anxiety at being quizzed by an inquisitor of the Holy Ordos.
There was no point pressing him now. Rinton’s story might easily be put
to the test with an autoséance, during which psychometric techniques would
simply reveal the truth of his father’s last moments to me.
Rinton walked me back to the Hall, and left me to my ponderings in
Aen’s study. It was as he had left it, I was told.
The room was half-panelled and lined for the most part with glazed
shelves of neatly bound books and dataslates. Discreet glowglobes hovered
around the edges of the room at head-height, set to a low luminosity, and a
selection of scroll-backed couches and overstuffed chairs were arranged in
front of the high-throated ceramic fireplace with its wood-burning fusion
stove.
The desk, under the diamond-paned west windows, was a wide crescent
of polished duralloy floated a metre off the carpet by passive suspensor
pods. The desk was clean and bare.
I sat at it, depressing slightly the hydraulics of the writing chair I was half
a head taller than Aen Froigre. I studied the mirror-smooth, slightly raked
surface of the desk. There was no sign of any control panel, but a gentle
wave of my hand across it woke up heat-sensitive touchplates engraved into
the duralloy’s finish. I touched a few, but they needed Aen’s touch probably
a combination of palmprint and genekey to unlock them.
That, or inquisition-grade software. I unpinned my Inquisitorial rosette,
which I had been wearing on the sternum of my black leather coat, and slid
open the signal port. Holding it low over the desk, I force fed the
touchplates with several magenta-level security override programs. It gave
up the fight almost at once, opening systems without even the need for
passwords.
Built into the stylish desk an item of furniture that had clearly cost Aen a
lot of money was a fairly powerful cogitator, a voxpict uplink, a message
archive, two filing archives, and a master control for the simple, limited
electronic systems built into the Hall. Separate pages of each file and
message could be displayed as a facsimile on the blotter plate and a touch
of a finger turned them or put them away. Aen had destroyed all paper
records.
I played with it for some time, but the most interesting thing I found was
a log of invoices for services provided at the fête, and a list of the
invitations. I copied both into my own dataslate.
Alizebeth and Gabon arrived while I was busy with that. Alizebeth had
been interviewing the household staff, and Gabon had been out, walking the
grounds.
‘There were over nine hundred guests here, sir,’ he said, ‘and maybe
another five hundred players, musicians, entertainers and carnival folk.’
‘Where from?’
‘Menizerre, mostly,’ he replied. ‘Local entertainers, a few troubadours
and some street tumblers from the biweekly textile market. The biggest
individual groups were Kalikin’s Company, an acclaimed troupe of
travelling actors, and Sunsable’s Touring Fair, who provided the games and
rides and diversions.’
I nodded. Gabon was as thorough as usual. A short, spare man in his one
fifties with cropped black hair and a bushy moustache, he had been with the
Dorsay Arbites for about seventy years before retiring into private service.
He wore a simple, refined dark blue suit that had been ingeniously tailored
to hide the fact that he was wearing a handgun in a shoulder rig.
‘What about you?’ I asked Alizebeth. She sat down on one of the
couches.
‘Nothing scintillating. The staff seem genuinely shocked and upset at the
death. They all react with outrage at the idea your friend might have had
any enemies.’
‘It seems quite clear to me that he did have some,’ I said.
Alizebeth reached into the folds of her gown and fished out a small, hard
object. She tossed it across onto the desk top and it landed with a tap.
There it extended four, multi-jointed limbs and scurried across onto my
palm.
I turned the wriggling poison-snooper over and pressed the recessed stud
on its belly. A little ball of hololithic energy coalesced above its head-
mounted projector and I read it as slowly scrolled around on its own axis.
‘Traces of lho, obscura and several other class II and III narcotics in the
garden area and the staff quarters. Penshel seed traces found in the stable
block. More lho, as well as listeria and e. coli in small amounts in the
kitchen section... hmmm...’
Alizebeth shrugged. ‘The usual mix of recreational drugs one might
expect, none in large quantities, and the kitchens’s as hygienic as anywhere.
You’d probably get the same sort of readings from Spaeton House.’
‘Probably. Penshel seeds, they’re quite unusual.’
‘A very mild stimulant,’ said Gabon. ‘I didn’t know anyone still used that
stuff. Time was, it was the drug of choice in the artists’ quarter of Dorsay,
back when I was on the force. The seeds are dried, rolled and smoked in
pipes. A little bohemian, an old man’s smoke.’
‘Most of the outdoor traces can be put down to the visiting entertainers,’
I mused, ‘plus a little off-duty pleasure from the staff or loose-living guests.
What about the stable block? Are any of Froigre’s ostlers penshel smokers?’
Alizebeth shook her head. ‘They’d cleared large parts of the stable area
to provide spaces for the fair stallholders.’
I put the snooper down on the desk and it wriggled back and forth for a
few moments until it got enough purchase to right itself. ‘So nothing
untoward, in fact. And certainly no significant toxins.’
‘None at all,’ said Alizebeth.
Damn. Given the description of Aen’s death, I had been quite sure poison
was the key, perhaps some assassin’s sophisticated toxin that had not shown
up on the initial medicae report. But Alizebeth’s snooper was high-grade
and thorough.
‘What do we do now?’ she asked.
I passed her my dataslate. ‘Send the contents of this to Aemos by direct
voxlink. See what he can come up with.’
Uber Aemos was my ancient and trusted savant. If anyone could see a
pattern or make a connection, it was him.
EVENING FELL. I went outside, alone. I felt annoyed and frustrated. In fact,
I felt thwarted. I’d come there as a favour to my old friend’s widow,
offering my services, and in most respects I was overqualified. I was an
Imperial inquisitor, and this was most likely just a job for the local arbites. I
had expected to have the entire matter sewn up in a few hours, to settle
things swiftly in a quick, unofficial investigation, and leave with the thanks
of the family for sparing them a long, drawn-out inquest.
But the clues just weren’t there. There was no motive, no obvious
antagonist, no aggressor, but still it seemed likely that Aen Froigre had been
killed. I looked at die medicae report again, hoping to find something that
would establish natural causes.
Nothing. Something, someone, had taken my friend’s life, but I couldn’t
tell what or who or why.
The evening skies were dark, stained a deep violet and smeared with
chasing milky clouds. An early moon shone, passing behind the running
trails of cloud every minute or so. A wind was gathering, and the stands of
trees beside the lawn were beginning to sway and swish. The leaves made a
cold sound, like rain.
I walked over to my flyer, popped the cargo trunk and took out
Barbarisater. I slowly freed it from its silk bindings and drew the long,
gleaming blade from its machined scabbard. Barbarisater had been an
heirloom sword, a psychically-attuned weapon from the forges of distant
Carthae and slaved to the minds of the generations of warrior women who
had wielded it. Enhancing its strength with pentagrammic wards, I had used
the long sabre in my battle against the heretic Quixos, during which
struggle it had been broken below the tip. Master swordsmiths had remade
the blade from the broken main portion, creating a shorter, straighter blade
by rounding off and edging the break and reducing the hilt. A good deal
smaller than its old self, now more a singlehanded rapier than a hand-and-a-
half sabre, it was still a potent weapon.
Naked, in my hand, it hummed and whined as my mind ran through it
and made it resonate. The incised wards glowed and sobbed out faint wisps
of smoke. I walked out over the grass under the seething trees, holding the
blade out before me like a dowsing rod, sweeping the scene, letting the
bladetip slide along the invisible angles of space. Twice, on my circuit of
the lawns, it twitched as if tugged by sprite hands, but I could discern
nothing from the locations.
But mere was something there. My first hint of a malign focus. My first
hint that not only was foul play involved, but that Lady Froigre might be
right.
Though they had left only the slightest traces behind them, infernal
powers had been at work here.
ALIZEBETH CAME INTO my room at eight the next morning. She woke me
by sitting down on the side of my bed and handed me a cup of hot, black
caffeine as I roused.
She was already dressed and ready for work. The day was bright. I could
hear the household coming to life: pans clattering the kitchen block and the
butler calling to his pages in the nearby gallery.
‘Bad storm in the night,’ she said. ‘Brought trees down.’
‘Really?’ I grumbled, sitting up and sipping the sweet, dark caffeine.
I looked at her. It wasn’t like Bequin to be so perky this early.
‘Out with it,’ I said.
She handed me a dataslate. ‘Aemos has been busy. Must’ve worked all
night.’
‘Through the storm.’
‘There was no storm up his way. It was local.’ I didn’t really hear that
reply. I was caught up in a close reading of the slate.
Failing to crossmatch just about every detail I had sent him, Aemos had
clearly become bored. The list of guests I had sent him had led to nothing,
despite his best efforts to make connections. The caterers and performers
had revealed nothing either. No links to the underworld or cult activity, no
misdeeds or priors, except for the usual clutch of innocent and minor
violations one might expect. One of the travelling actors had been charged
with affray twenty years before, and another had done time for grievous
wounding, that sort of thing.
The only item that had flagged any sort of connection was the description
of Aen Froigre’s death. Aemos had only turned to that rather vague clue
once he’d exhausted all others.
In the past twenty months, eleven people in the Drunner Region of
Gudrun, which is to say the coastal area encompassing Menizerre, Dorsay
and Insume all the way to Madua chapeltown, had died of a similar,
mystery ailment. Only a tight, deliberate search like the one Aemos had
conducted would have shown up such a connection, given the scale of area
involved and the size of population. Listed together, the deaths stood out
like a sore thumb.
Here, Aemos had come into his own. Another clerk might have sent
those findings to me and waited for direction, but Aemos, hungry to answer
the questions himself, had pressed on, trying to make a pattern out of them.
No simple task. There was nothing to demographically or geographically
link the victims. A housewife here, a millkeeper there, a landowner in one
small village, a community doctor in another, seventy kilometres away.
The only thing they had in common was the sudden, violent and
inexplicable nature of their demises: seizures, abrupt, fatal.
I set down my cup and scrolled on, aware that Alizebeth was grinning at
me.
‘Get to the last bit,’ she advised. ‘Aemos strikes again.’
Right at the last, Aemos revealed another connection.
A day or two before each death, the victim’s locality had been paid a visit
by Sunsable’s Touring Fair.
LADY FROIGRE WAS most perturbed to see us about to leave. ‘There are
questions here still...’ she began.
‘And I’m going to seek the answers,’ I said. Trust me. I believe my
savant has hit upon something.’
She nodded, unhappy. Rinton stepped forward and put his arm around his
mother’s shoulders.
‘Trust me,’ I repeated and walked out across the drive to my waiting
flyer.
I could hear the sound of chain blades, and turned from the car to walk
around the side of the hall. One of the trees brought down in the night’s
freak storm had crashed part of the stable block and the housemen were
working to saw up the huge trunk and clear it.
‘Is that where you detected Penshel seed?’ I asked Alizebeth when she
came to find out what was keeping me.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘Fetch my blade.’
I called the housemen away from their work, and walked into the
collapsed ruin of the stable, crunching over heaps of coarse sawdust. The
ivy-clad tree still sprawled through the burst roof.
Alizebeth brought me Barbarisater and I drew it quickly. By then Lady
Froigre and Rinton Froigre had emerged to see what I was doing.
Barbarisater hummed in my hand, louder and more throatily than it had
done the previous night. As soon as I entered that part of the stable block,
the particular stall the tree had smashed, it jumped. The taste of Chaos was
here.
‘What was this used for?’ I asked. ‘During the fete, what was this area
used for?’
‘Storage,’ said Lady Froigre. ‘The people from the fair wanted to keep
equipment and belongings out of sight. Food too, I think. One man had
trays of fresh figs he wanted to keep out of the light.’
‘And the hololithographer,’ said Rinton. ‘He used one of those stalls as a
dark room.’
SO HOW DO you find a travelling fair in an area the size of the Drunner
Region? If you have a copy of their most recent invoice, it’s easy. The
fairmaster, eager to be paid for his services at Froigre Hall, had left as a
payment address an inn eighty kilometres away in Seabrud. From the
invoice, I saw that Aen had been asked to mail the payment within five
days. The fair moved around a great deal, and the travelling folk didn’t
believe much in the concept of credit accounts.
From Seabrud, we got a fix on the location of Sunsable’s Fair.
They had pitched on a meadow outside the village of Brudmarten, a little,
rustic community of ketherds and weavers that was flanked by a lush,
deciduous woodland hillside to the east and marshy, cattle-trampled fields
below at the river spill to the west.
It was late afternoon on a hot, close day, the air edged with the heavy,
fulminous threat of storms. The sky was dark overhead, but the corn was
bright and golden down in the meadows, and pollen balls blew in the breeze
like thistle fibres. Graincrakes whooped in the corn stands, and small
warblers of the most intense blue darted across the hedges.
Gabon lowered the limo to rest in a lane behind the village kirk, a pale,
Low Gothic temple in need of upkeep. A noble statue of the Emperor
Immaculate stood in the overgrown graveyard, a roost for wood doves. I
buckled on my sword and covered it with a long leather cloak. Gabon
locked the car.
‘Stay with me,’ I told Alizebeth, and then turned to Gabon. ‘Shadow us.’
‘Yes, sir.’
We walked down the lane towards the fair.
Even from a distance, we could hear the noise and feel the energy. The
arrival of the fair had brought the folk of Brudmarten and the neighbouring
hamlets out in force. Pipe organs were trilling and wheezing in the lank air,
and there was the pop and whizz of firecrackers. I could hear laughter, the
clatter of rides, the ringing of score bells, children screaming, rowdy men
carousing, pistons hissing. The smell of warm ale wafted from the tavern
tent.
The gate in the meadow’s hedge had been turned into an entranceway
arched with a gaudy, hand-painted sign that declared Sunsable’s Miraculous
Fair of Fairs open. A white-eyed twist at the gateway took our coins for
admission.
Inside, on the meadow, all manner of bright, vulgar sights greeted us. The
carousel, lit up with gas lamps. The ring toss. The neat, pink box tent of the
clairvoyant. The churning hoop of the whirligig, spilling out the squeals of
children. The colourful shouts of the freak show barker. The burnt sugar
smell of floss makers. The clang of test your strength machines.
For a penny, you could ride the shoulders of a Battle Titan actually an
agricultural servitor armoured with painted sections of rusty silage hopper.
For another penny, you could shoot greenskins in the lasgallery, or touch the
Real and Completely Genuine shin bone of Macharius, or dunk for ploins.
For tuppence, you could gaze into the Eye of Terror and have your heroism
judged by a hooded man with a stutter who claimed to be an ex Space
Marine. The Eye of Terror in this case was a pit dug in the ground and filled
with chemical lamps and coloured glass filters.
Nearby, a small donation allowed you to watch an oiled man struggle free
from chains, or a burning sack, or a tin bathtub full of broken glass, or a set
of stocks.
‘Just a penny, sir, just a penny!’ howled a man on stilts with a
harlequined face as he capered past me. ‘For the young lady!’
I decided not to ask what my penny might buy.
‘I want to go look at the freak show,’ Alizebeth told me.
‘Save your money... it’s all around us,’ I growled.
We pushed on. Coloured balloons drifted away over the field into the
encroaching darkness of the thunderhead. Corn crickets rasped furiously in
the trampled stalks all about us. Drunken, painted faces swam at us, some
lacking teeth, some with glittering augmetic eyes.
‘Over there,’ I whispered to Alizebeth.
Past the brazier stand of a woman selling paper cones of sugared nuts,
and a large handcart stacked with wire cages full of songbirds, was a small
booth tent of heavy red material erected at the side of a brightly painted
trailer. A wooden panel raised on bunting-wrapped posts announced
‘Hololiths! Most Lifelike! Most Agreeable!’ below which a smaller notice
said ‘A most delightful gift, or a souvenir of the day, captured by the magic
art of a master hololithographer,’ A frail old man with tufted white hair and
small spectacles was seated outside the booth on a folding canvas chair,
eating a meat pie that was so hot he had to keep blowing on it.
‘Why don’t you go and engage his interest?’ I suggested.
Alizebeth left my side, pushed through the noisy crowd and stopped by
his booth. A sheet of flakboard had been erected beside the booth’s
entrance, and on it were numerous hololithic pictures mounted for display:
some miniatures, some landscapes, some family groups. Alizebeth studied
them with feigned interest. The old man immediately leapt up off his chair,
stowed the half-eaten pie behind the board and brushed the crumbs off his
robes. I moved round to the side, staying in the crowd, watching. I paused
to examine the caged birds, though in fact I was looking through their cages
at the booth tent.
The old man approached Bequin courteously.
‘Madam, good afternoon! I see your attention has been arrested by my
display of work. Are they not fairly framed and well-composed?’
‘Indeed,’ she said.
‘You have a good eye, madam,’ he said, ‘for so often in these county fairs
the work of the hololithgrapher is substandard. The composition is
frequently poor and the plate quality fades with time. Not so with your
humble servant. I have plied this trade of portraiture for thirty years and I
fancy I have skill for it. You see this print here? The lakeshore at Entreve?’
‘It is a pleasing scene.’
‘You are very kind, madam. It is hand-coloured, like many of my frames.
But this very print was made in the summer of... 329, if my memory serves.
And you’ll appreciate, there is no fading, no loss of clarity, no
discolouration.’
‘It has preserved itself well.’
‘It has,’ he agreed, merrily. ‘I have patented my own techniques, and I
prepare the chemical compounds for the plates by hand, in my modest
studio adjoining.’ He gestured to his trailer. ‘That is how I can maintain the
quality and the perfect grade of the hololiths, and reproduce and print them
to order with no marked loss of standard from original to duplicate. My
reputation rests upon it. Up and down the bye-ways of the land, the name
Bakunin is a watchword for quality portraiture.’
Alizebeth smiled. ‘It’s most impressive, Master Bakunin. And how
much...?’
‘Aha!’ he grinned. ‘I thought you might be tempted, madam, and may I
say it would be a crime for your beauty to remain unrecorded! My services
are most affordable.’
I moved round further, edging my way to the side of his booth until he
and Alizebeth were out of sight behind the awning. I could hear him still
making his pitch to her.
On the side of the trailer, further bold statements and enticements were
painted in a flourishing script. A large sign read ‘Portraits two crowns,
group scenes three crowns, gilded miniatures a half-crown only, offering
many a striking and famous backcloth for a crown additional.’
I wandered behind the trailer. It was parked at the edge of the fairground,
near to a copse of fintle and yew that screened the meadow from pastures
beyond the ditch. It was damp and shaded here, small animals rustling in
the thickets. I tried to look in at one small window, but it was shuttered. I
touched the side of the trailer and felt Barbarisater twitch against my hip.
There was a door near the far end of the trailer. I tried it, but it was locked.
‘What’s your business?’ growled a voice.
Three burly fairground wranglers had approached along the copse side of
the booths. They had been smoking lho-sticks behind their trailer on a
break.
‘Not yours,’ I assured them.
‘You had best be leaving Master Bakunin’s trailer alone,’ one said. All
three were built like wrestlers, their bared arms stained with crude tattoos. I
had no time for this.
‘Go away now,’ I said, pitching my will through my voice. They all
blinked, not quite sure what had happened to their minds, and then simply
walked away as if I wasn’t there.
I returned my attention to the door, and quickly forced the lock with my
multi-key. To my surprise, the thin wooden door still refused to open. I
wondered if it was bolted from inside, but as I put more weight into it, it did
shift a little, enough to prove there was nothing physical holding it. Then it
banged back shut as if drawn by immense suction.
My pulse began to race. I could feel the sour tang of warpcraft in the air
and Barbarisater was now vibrating in its scabbard. It was time to dispense
with subtleties.
I paced around to the front of the booth, but there was no longer any sign
of Bequin or the old man. Stooping, I went in under the entrance flap. An
inner drop curtain of black cloth stopped exterior light from entering the
tent.
I pushed that aside.
‘I will be with you shortly, sir,’ Bakunin called, ‘if you would give me a
moment.’
‘I’m not a customer,’ I said. I looked around. The tent was quite small,
and lit by the greenish glow of gas mantles that ran, I supposed, off the
trailer supply. Alizebeth was sat at the far side on a ladderback chair with a
dropcloth of cream felt behind her. Bakunin was facing her, carefully
adjusting his hololithic camera, a brass and teak machine mounted on a
wooden tripod. He looked round at me curiously, his hands still polishing a
brass-rimmed lens. Alizebeth rose out of her seat.
‘Gregor?’ she asked.
‘The good lady is just sitting for a portrait, sir. It’s all very civilised,’
Bakunin peered at me, unsure what to make of me. He smiled and offered
his hand. ‘I am Bakunin, artist and hololithographer.’
‘I am Eisenhorn, Imperial inquisitor.’
‘Oh,’ he said and took a step backwards. ‘I... I...’
‘You’re wondering why a servant of the Ordos has just walked into your
booth,’ I finished for him. Bakunin’s mind was like an open book. There
was, I saw at once, no guile there, except for the natural moneymaking
trickery of a fairground rogue. Whatever else he was, Bakunin was no
heretic.
‘You took a portrait of Lord Froigre at the fete held on his lands just the
other day?’ I said, thinking of the picture on the harpsichord back at the
hall.
‘I did,’ he said. ‘His lordship was pleased. I made no charge for the work,
sir. It was a gift to thank his lordship for his hospitality. I thought perhaps
some of his worthy friends might see the work and want the like for
themselves, I...’
He doesn’t know, I thought. He has no clue what this is about. He’s
trying to work out how he might have drawn this investigation to himself.
‘Lord Froigre is dead,’ I told him.
He went pale. ‘No, that’s... that’s...’
‘Master Bakunin... do you know if any other of your previous subjects
have died? Died soon after your work was complete?’
‘I don’t, I’m sure. Sir, what are you implying?’
‘I have a list of names,’ I said, unclipping my dataslate. ‘Do you keep
records of your work?’
‘I keep them all, all the exposed plates, in case that copies or
replacements are needed. I have full catalogues of all pictures.’
I showed him the slate. ‘Do you recognise any of these names?’
His hands were shaking. He said, ‘I’ll have to check them against my
catalogue,’ but I knew for a fact he’d recognised some of them at once.
‘Let’s do that together,’ I said. Alizebeth followed us as we went through
the back of the tent into the trailer. It was a dark, confined space, and
Bakunin kept apologising. Every scrap of surface, even the untidy flat of his
little cot bed, was piled with spares and partly disassembled cameras. There
was a musty, chemical stink, mixed with the scent of Penshel seeds.
Bakunin’s pipe lay in a small bowl. He reached into a crate under the cot
and pulled out several dog-eared record books.
‘Let me see now,’ he began.
There was a door at the end of the little room. ‘What’s through there?’
‘My dark room, along with the file racks for the exposed plates.’
‘It has a door to the outside?’
Yes,’ he said.
‘Locked?’
‘No...’
‘You have an assistant then, someone you ordered to hold the door shut?’
‘I have no assistant..,’ he said, puzzled.
‘Open this door,’ I told him. He put down the books and went to the
communicating door. Just from his body language, I could tell he had been
expecting it to open easily.
‘I don’t understand,’ he said. ‘It’s never jammed before.’
‘Stand back,’ I said, and drew Barbarisater. The exposed blade filled the
little trailer with ozone and Bakunin yelped.
I put the blade through the door with one good swing and ripped it open.
There was a loud bang of atmospheric decompression, and fetid air swept
over us. A dark, smoky haze drifted out.
‘Emperor of Mankind, what is that?’
‘Warpcraft,’ I said. ‘You say you mix your own oxides and solutions?’
‘Yes.’
‘Where do you get your supplies from?’
‘Everywhere, here and there, sometimes from apothecaries, or market
traders or...’
Anywhere. Bakunin had experimented with all manner of compounds
over the years to create the best, most effective plates for his camera. He’d
never been fussy about where the active ingredients came from. Something
in his workshop, something in his rack of flasks and bottles, was tainted.
I took a step towards the dark room. In the halflight, things were
flickering, half-formed and pale. The baleful energies lurking in Bakunin’s
workshop could sense I was a threat, and were trying to protect themselves
by sealing the doors tight to keep me out.
I crossed the threshold into the dark room. Alizebeth’s cry of warning
was lost in the shrieking of tormented air that suddenly swirled around me.
Glass bottles and flasks of mineral tincture vibrated wildly in metal racks
above Bakunin’s work bench. Jars of liquid chemicals and unguent oils
shattered and sprayed their contents into the air. The little gas-jet burner
flared and ignited, its rubber tube thrashing like a snake. Glass plates, each
a square the size of a dataslate, and each sleeved in a folder of tan card,
were jiggling and working themselves out of the wooden racks on the far
side of the blacked out room. There were thousands of them, each one the
master exposure of one of Bakunin’s hololiths. The first yanked clear of the
shelf as if tugged by a sucking force, and I expected it to shatter on the
floor, but it floated in the air. Quickly others followed suit. Light from
sources I couldn’t locate played in the air, casting specks and flashes of
colour all around. The air itself became dark brown, like tobacco.
I raised my sword. A negative plate came flying at my head and I struck
at it. Shards of glass flew in all directions. Another came at me and I
smashed that too. More flew from the shelves like a spray of playing cards,
whipping through the air towards me. I made a series of quick uwe sar and
ulsar parries, bursting the glass squares as they struck in. I missed one, and
it sliced my cheek with its edge before hitting the wall behind me like a
throwing knife.
‘Get him out of here!’ I yelled to Alizebeth. The trailer was shaking.
Outside there was a crash of thunder and rain started to hammer on the low
roof. The hurtling plates were driving me back, and Barbarisater had
become a blur in my hands as it struck out to intercept them all.
Then the ghosts came. Serious men in formal robes. Gentlewomen in
long gowns. Solemn children with pale faces. A laughing innkeeper with
blotchy cheeks. Two farmhands, with their arms around each other’s
shoulders. More, still more, shimmering in the dirty air, made of smoke,
their skins white, their clothes sepia, their expressions frozen at the moment
they had been caught by the camera. They clawed and tugged at me with
fingers of ice, pummelled me with psychokinetic fists. Some passed
through me like wraiths, chilling my marrow. The malevolence hiding in
that little trailer was conjuring up all the images Bakunin had immortalised
in his career, ripping them off the negative plates and giving them form.
I staggered back, tears appearing in my cloak. Their touch was as sharp
as the edge of the glass plates. Their hollow screaming filled my ears. Then,
with a sickening lurch, the world itself distorted and changed. The trailer
was gone. For a moment I was standing on a sepia shoreline, then I was an
uninvited guest at a country wedding. My sword hacking and flashing, I
stumbled on into a baptism, then a colourised view of the Atenate
Mountains, then a feast in a guild hall. The ghosts surged at me, frozen
hands clawing. The innkeeper with the blotchy cheeks got his icy fists
around my throat though his face was still open in laughter. I chopped
Barbarisater through him and he billowed like smoke. A sad-faced
housemaid pulled at my arm and a fisherman struck at me with his boat
hook.
I began to recite the Litany of Salvation, yelling it into the leering faces
that beset me. A few crumpled and melted like cellulose exposed to flame.
I heard gunshots. Gabon was to my right, firing his weapon. He was
standing on the pier at Dorsay at sunset, in the middle of a intervillage game
of knockball, and a harvest festival, all at the same time. The conflicting
scenes blurred and merged around him. A bride and her groom, along with
five mourners from a funeral and a retiring arbites constable in full medals,
were attacking him.
‘Get back!’ I yelled. Barbarisater was glowing white-hot. Thunder
crashed again, shaking the earth. Gabon shrieked as the bride’s fingers
ripped through his face, and as he stumbled backwards, whizzing glass
plates chopped into him like axe heads.
His blood was in the air, like rain. It flooded into the ghosts and stained
their sepia tones crimson and their pale flesh pink. I felt fingers like knives
draw across the flesh of my arms and back. There were too many of them.
I couldn’t trust my eyes. According to them, I was standing on a
riverbank, and also the front steps of an Administratum building. The
locations overlaid each other impossibly, and neither was real.
I leapt, and lashed out with my blade. I hit something, tore through and
immediately found myself rolling on the rain-sodden turf behind the trailer.
Lightning split the darkness overhead and the rain was torrential. The
storm and the bizarre activity around Bakunin’s booth had sent the
commonfolk fleeing from the meadow. The trailer was still vibrating and
shaking, and oily brown smoke was gushing from the hole in the side wall
I’d cut to break my way out. Inside, lights crackled and flashed and the
phantom screaming continued. The warptaint was berserk.
Bakunin appeared, looking desperate, with Alizebeth close behind him.
He put his hands to his mouth in shock at the sight of me torn and bloodied.
‘Where is it?’ I snarled.
‘Third shelf up, above the workbench,’ he stammered. The green bottle.
‘I needed tincture of mercury, years ago, years ago, and an old woman in
one of the villages gave it to me and said it would do as well. I use it all the
time now. The emulsions it mixes are perfect. My work has never been
better.’
He looked down at the grass, shaking and horrified. ‘I should have
realised,’ he muttered. ‘I should have realised. No matter how much I used,
the bottle never emptied.’
‘Third shelf up?’ I confirmed.
‘I’ll show you,’ he said, and sprang to the trailer, clambering in through
the hole I had smashed.
‘Bakunin! No!’
I followed him inside, tumbling back into the jumble of landscapes and
the maelstrom of screaming ghosts. Just for a moment, a brief moment, I
saw Aen Froigre amongst them.
Then I was falling through another wedding, a hunting scene, a
stockman’s meeting, a farrier’s smithy, the castle of Elempite by moonlight,
a cattle market, a
I heard Bakunin scream.
I deflected three more deadly hololith plates, and slashed through the
thicket of howling ghosts. Spectral, as if it wasn’t there, I saw the
workbench and the shelves. The green bottle, glowing internally with jade
fire.
I raised Barbarisater and smashed the bottle with the edge of the
shivering blade.
The explosion shredded the inner partition wall and lurched the trailer
onto its side. Dazed, I lay on the splintered wall, sprawled amongst the
debris of glass and wood.
The screaming stopped.
SOMEONE HAD CALLED the local arbites. They moved in through the
crowds of onlookers as the last of the rain fell and the skies began to clear.
I showed them my credentials and told them to keep the crowd back
while I finished my work. The trailer was already burning, and Alizebeth
and I threw the last few hololith prints into the flames.
The pictures were fading now. Superimposed on each one, every portrait,
every landscape, every miniature, was a ghost exposure. An afterimage.
Bakunin, screaming his last scream forever.
HERETICUS
BY ORDER OF HIS MOST HOLY MAJESTY
THE GOD-EMPEROR OF TERRA
SEQUESTERED INQUISITORIAL DOSSIERS
AUTHORISED PERSONS ONLY
CASE FILE 442:41F:JL3:Kbu
Please enter your authority code > ********
Validating...
Thank you, Inquisitor. You may proceed.
To Gregor Eisenhorn, a communiqué
Carried by Guild Astropathica (Scarus) via meme-wave 45~a.639
triple intra Path detail:
Origin: Thracian Primaris, Helican Sub 81281 origin date:
142.386.M41
(relayed: divergent M-12/Ostall VII)
Received: Durer, Ophidian Sub 52981 reception date: 144.386.M41
Transcript carried and logged as per header
(redundant copy filed buffer 4362 key 11)
Author: Lord Inquisitor Phlebas Alessandro Rorken Master of the Ordo
Xenos Helican, Inquisition High Council Officio, Scarus Sector
My dear Gregor,
In the name of the God-Emperor, and of the Holy Inquisition, greetings.
I trust the elders of Durer have welcomed you in a manner befitting your
status. Hierarch Onnopel has been charged by my officio to ensure that you
are provided with all requirements for the long task ahead. May I take this
opportunity to express my gratitude to you again for agreeing to conduct
this Examination in my stead. My health, so it would appear to everyone but
me, is still a matter for concern. My physician clucks over me night and
day. They have changed my blood a number of times and talk of further
surgery, but it is all for naught. I am healthy and sound and would be on the
road to recovery but for their coddling. Indeed, I would be on the road to
Durer too but for that.
Yet it seems a quack from the Officio Medicae has authority over even
one such as I. The work I have done to bring the heretics of Durer to trial
must be finished in my absence, and I can think of no surer hand than yours
to steer the business.
I write to you for two reasons – apart, that is, for expressing my thanks.
Despite my efforts, Sakarof Lord Hereticus has insisted on sending two of
his own delegates to the Examination: Koth and Menderef, you know them
both. I’m sorry, Gregor, but you must tolerate them. They are a burden I
would have spared you from.
Secondly, I am forced to saddle you with Inquisitor Bastian Verveuk. He
was an interrogator under Lord Osma, and had come to my staff to finish
his preparation. I had promised him a hand in the Examination, primarily
because of his good offices in securing the central prosecutions. Please
accommodate him in your counsel, for my sake. He is a good man, young
and untried, but capable, though he reeks of the puritan. Didn’t we all at
that age? He will arrive with you on the 151st. Make him as welcome as
you can. I know you hate to incorporate unknowns into your camp, but I ask
this as a personal favour. Osma will make things very difficult for me if I
retard his pupil’s progress at this late stage.
I wish you speed, wisdom and success in the closure of this inspection.
Sealed and notarised by astropathicae clerk, this 142nd day of 386.M41.
The Emperor protects!
Rorken
[message ends]
To Gregor Eisenhorn, a communiqué
Carried by Guild Astropathica (Scarus) via meme-loop repeat
45~3.5611 secure Path detail:
Origin: Thracian Primaris, Helican Sub 81281 origin date:
142.386.M41
(relayed: loop navigatus 351/echo Gernale beacon)
Received: Durer, Ophidian Sub 52981 reception date: 144.386.M41
Transcript carried and logged as per header
(redundant copy filed buffer 7002 key 34)
Author: Inquisitor Bastian Verveuk, Ordo Xenos Inquisition High
Council Officio, Scarus Sector, Scarus Major
Salutations, sir!
In the name of the God-Emperor, hallowed be his eternal vigil, and by the
High Lords of Terra, I commend myself your eminence and trust that this
communiqué finds your eminence in good health.
Great was my excitement when my Lord Rorken informed me that I was
to take a part, at his side, in the formal Examination of the vile and
abominated heretics of Durer. At once, I threw myself into the cataloguing
of advance discovery, and assisted in the compilation of the evidentiary
archive that would support the particulars of the Examination.
You may then imagine my terrible disappointment when my lord’s sudden
and lamentable illness seemed to cast the very occurrence of that divine
work into doubt. Now, this very hour, my lord has informed me that you are
to oversee the matter as his proxy and that you have agreed to find a place
for me at your side.
I cannot contain my exhilaration! The chance to work at close hand with
one such as you! I have studied your holy work with awe since my earliest
days in the preparatory scholams. You are an object lesson in devotion and
puritanical duty, an example to us all. I look forward with great eagerness
to discussing matters of contra-heretical law with you, and perhaps hearing
first hand a few scraps of your dazzling insight. It is my most fervent
ambition to pursue the rank of inquisitor in the Ordo Hereticus, and I am
sure I would be better armed for such duty if I had the benefit of learning
from your own first-hand accounts of such infamous beings as the dread
Quixos.
You will find me a devoted and hard-working colleague. I count the days
until we can begin this sacred work together. Hallowed be the Golden
Throne!
Your servant,
Verveuk
[message ends]
To Lord Rorken, a communiqué
Carried by Guild Astropathica (Ophidia) via meme-wave 3Ql^c.l22
double intra Paul detail:
Origin: Durer, Ophidian Sub 52981 origin date: 144.386.M41
(relayed: divergent B-3,’loop Gernale beacon)
Received: Thracian Primaris, Helican Sub 81281 reception date:
149.386.M41
Transcript carried and logged as per header
(redundant copy deleted from buffer)
Author: Gregor Eisenhorn, Inquisitor
re: Bastian Verveuk
My lord, what foetid corner of the Imperium breeds these fawning idiots?
Now you really owe me.
G. E.
[message ends]
ONE
The case of Udwin Pridde.
Small talk with Verveuk.
Something like vengeance.
WHEN THE TIME came, Fayde Thuring was damn near impossible to stop.
I blame myself for that. I had let him run on for too long. For the best
part of eight decades he had escaped my attentions, and in that time he had
grown immeasurably from the minor warp-dabbler I had once let slip away.
My mistake. But I wasn’t the one to pay.
ON THE 160TH day of 386.M41 a nobleman in his late one sixties
appeared at the Examination hearings held in the Imperial Minster of Eriale,
the legislative capital of the Uvege in the south-west of Durer’s third largest
landmass.
He was a landowner, widowed young, and he had built his fortune in
post-liberation Durer society on a successful agri-combine venture and the
inherited wealth of his late wife. In 376, as a mature, successful and highly
eligible newcomer amongst the gentry of the Uvege, a prosperous region of
verdant farmland, he had made a socially-advancing second marriage. His
new bride was Betrice, thirty years his junior, the eldest daughter of the
venerable House Samargue. The Samargue family’s ancient wealth was at
that time seeping away as the efficient land-use policies of Administratum-
sponsored combines slowly took control of the Uvege’s pastoral economy.
The nobleman’s name was Udwin Pridde, and he had been summoned by
the hierarch of the See of Eriale to answer charges of recidivism, warpcraft
and, above all, heresy.
FACING HIM ACROSS the marble floor of the Minster was a dignified
Inquisitorial body of the most august quality. Inquisitor Eskane Koth, an
Amalathian, born and bred on Thracian Primaris, one day to be known as
the Dove of Avignon. Inquisitor Laslo Menderef, a native of lowland
Sancour, Menderef the Grievous as he would become, an Istvaanian with a
cold appreciation of warp-crime and poor body hygiene. Inquisitor Poul
Rassi, son of the Kilwaddi Steppes, a sound, elderly even-handed servant of
order. The novice Inquisitor Bastian Verveuk.
And myself. Gregor Eisenhorn. Inquisitor and presiding examiner.
Pridde was the first of two hundred and sixty individuals identified by
Lord Rorken’s work as possible heretics to be weighed by this Formal
Court of Examination. He looked nervous but dignified as he faced us,
toying with his lace collar. He had hired a pardoner called Fen of Clincy to
speak on his behalf.
It was the third day of the hearings. As the pardoner droned on,
describing Pridde in terms that would have made a saint blush for want of
virtue, I thumbed half-heartedly through the catalogue of pending cases and
sighed at the scale of the work to come. The catalogue – we all had a copy –
was thicker than my wrist. This was the third day already and still we had
not progressed further than the preamble of the first case. The opening rites
had taken a full day and the legal recognition of the authority of the Ordos
Helican here on Durer, together with other petty matters of law, yet another.
I wondered, may the God-Emperor forgive my lack of charity, if Lord
Rorken’s illness was genuine or just a handy excuse to avoid this tedium.
Outside, it was a balmy summer day. Wealthy citizens of Eriale were
boating on the ornamental lakes, lunching in the hillside trattorias of the
Uvege, conducting lucrative business in the caffeine houses of the city’s
Commercia.
In the echoing, cool vault of the Minster, there was nothing but the
whining voice of Fen of Clincy.
Golden sunlight shafted in through the celestory windows and bathed the
stalls of the audience gallery. That area was half empty. A few dignitaries,
clerks, local hierarchs and archivists of the Planetary Chronicle. They
looked drowsy to me and I knew their account of these proceedings would
be at odds with the official log recorded by the pict-servitors. Hierarch
Onnopel himself was already dozing. The fat idiot. If his grip on the
spiritual fibre of his flock had been tighter, these hearings might not have
been necessary.
I saw my ancient savant, Uber Aemos, apparently listening intently,
though I knew his mind was far away. I saw Alizebeth Bequin, my dear
friend and colleague, reading a copy of the court briefing. She looked
stately and prim in her long dark gown and half-veil. As she pretended to
turn the pages, I glimpsed the data-slate concealed inside its cover. Another
volume of poetry, no doubt. The glimpse made me chuckle, and I hastened
to stifle the sound.
‘My lord? Is there a problem?’ the pardoner asked, breaking off in mid-
flow.
I waved a hand. ‘None. Please continue, sir. And hasten to your
summary, perhaps?’
The Minster at Eriale was only a few decades old, rebuilt from war
rubble in a triumphant High Gothic style. As little as half a century before,
this entire sub-sector – the Ophidian sub-sector – had been in the embrace
of the arch-enemy. In fact, it had been my honour to witness the
embarkation of the great Imperial taskforce that had liberated it. That had
been on Gudrun, the former capital world of the Helican sub-sector, one
hundred and fifty years previously. Sometimes I felt very old.
I had lived, by that time, for one hundred and eighty-eight years, so I was
in early middle age by the standards of privileged Imperial society. Careful
augmetic work and juvenat conditioning had retarded the natural
deteriorations of my body and mind, and more significant artifice had
repaired wounds and damage my career had cost me. I was robust, healthy
and vigorous, but sometimes the sheer profusion of my memories reminded
me how long I had been alive. Of course, I was but a youth compared to
Aemos.
Sitting there, in a gilt lifter throne at the centre of the high table, dressed
in the robes and regalia of a lord chief examiner, I reflected that I had
perhaps been too hard on that duffer Onnopel. Any reconquered territory,
taken back from the taint of the warp, would perforce be plagued by heresy
for some time as Imperial law reinstated itself. Indeed, ordos dedicated to
the Ophidian sub-sector had yet to be founded, so jurisdiction lay with the
neighbouring Officio Helican. An Examination such as this was timely.
Fifty years of freedom and it was right for the Inquisition to move in and
inspect the fabric of the new society. This was necessary tedium, I tried to
remind myself, and Rorken had been correct in calling for it. The Ophidian
sub-sector, thriving in its recovery, needed the Inquisition to check on its
spiritual health just as this rebuilt Minster needed stonemasons to keep an
eye on its integrity as it settled.
‘My lord inquisitor?’ Verveuk whispered to me. I looked up and realised
Fen the pardoner had finished at last.
‘Your duty is noted, pardoner. You may retire,’ I said, scribing a mark on
my slate. He bowed.
‘I trust the accused has paid you in advance for your time,’ said
Inquisitor Koth archly. ‘His assets may be sequestered, ’ere long.’
‘I have been paid for my statement, sir,’ confirmed Fen.
‘Generously, it seems,’ I observed. ‘Was it by the word?’
My fellow inquisitors chuckled. Except Verveuk, who barked out a over-
loud whinny as if I had just made the finest jest this side of the Golden
Throne. By the Throne, he was a sycophantic weasel! If ever a windpipe
cried out for a brisk half-hitch, his was it.
At least his snorting had woken Onnopel up. The hierarch roused with a
start and growled ‘hear, hear!’ with a faux-knowing nod of his many
chinned head as if he had been listening intently all along. Then he went
bright red and pretended to look for something under his pew.
‘If there are no further comments from the Ministorum,’ I said dryly,
‘perhaps we can move on. Inquisitor Menderef?’
‘Thank you, lord chief examiner,’ said Menderef politely, rising to his
feet.
THE PARDONER HAD scurried away, leaving Pridde alone in the open
expanse of the wide floor. Pridde was in chains, but his fine garb with its
lace trim seemed to discomfort him more than the shackles. Menderef
walked around the high table to face him, turning the pages of a manuscript
slowly.
He began his cross-examination.
Laslo Menderef was a slender man a century old. His thin brown hair
was laquered up over his skull in a hard widow’s peak and his face was
sallow and taut-skinned. He wore a long, plain velvet robe of selpic blue
with his rosette of office and the symbol of the Ordo Hereticus pinned at his
breast. He had a chilling manner that I admired, though I cared not at all for
the man’s radical philosophy. He was also the most articulate interrogator in
Sakarof’s officio. His long-fingered, agile hands found a place in the
manuscript and stopped there.
‘Udwin Pridde?’ he said.
‘Sir,’ Pridde answered.
‘On the 42nd day of 380.M41, you called upon the house of an
unlicensed practitioner of apothecary in Clude and purchased two phials of
umbilical blood, a hank of hair from the head of an executed murderer and a
fertility doll carved from a human finger bone.’
‘I did not, sir.’
‘Oh,’ said Menderef amiably, ‘then I am mistaken,’ He turned back and
nodded to me. ‘It appears we are done here, lord examiner,’ he said. He
paused just long enough for Pridde to sag with relief and then wheeled
round again. Glory, but his technique was superb.
‘You’re a liar,’ he said. Pridde recoiled, suddenly alert once more.
‘S-sir—’
‘The apothecary was executed for her practices by the Eriale arbites in
the winter of 382. She kept annotated records of her dealings which, I
presume, she foolishly thought might serve as some kind of bargaining tool
in the event of her apprehension. Your name is there. The matter of your
purchases is there. Would you like to see it?’
‘It is a fabrication, sir.’
‘A fabrication... uhm...’ Menderef paced slowly around the defendant.
Pridde tried to keep his eyes on him but didn’t dare turn from his spot. Once
Menderef was behind him, Pridde started to shake.
‘You’ve never been to Clude?’
‘I go there sometimes, sir.’
‘Sometimes?’
‘Once, maybe twice every year.’
‘For what purpose?’
‘There is a feed merchant in Clude who—’
‘Yes, there is. Aarn Wisse. We have spoken with him. Though he admits
to knowing you and doing business with you, he says he never saw you at
all in 380 or the year after. He has no receipt of purchase for you in his
ledger.’
‘He is mistaken, sir.’
‘Is he? Or are you?’
‘Sir?’
‘Pridde... your pardoner has already taken up too much of the day
extolling – and magnifying – your multiple virtues. Do not waste any more
of our time. We know you visited the apothecary. We know what you
purchased. Make us like you more by collaborating with this line of
questioning.’
Pridde shuddered. In a small voice, he said, ‘I did make those purchases,
sir. Yes.’
‘Louder, for the court, please. I see amber lights winking on the vox-
recorders. They’re not picking up your voice. The lights have to glow
green, you see. Like they are now, hearing me. Green means they hear you.’
‘Sir, I did make those purchases!’
Menderef nodded and looked back at his manuscript. ‘Two phials of
umbilical blood, a hank of hair from the head of an executed murderer and
fertility doll carved from a human finger bone. Are those the purchases you
mean?’
‘Yes, sir...’
‘Green lights, Pridde, green lights!’
‘Yes, sir!’
Menderef closed the manuscript and stalked round in front of Pridde
again. ‘Would you like to explain why?’
Pridde looked at him and swallowed hard. ‘For the stock.’
‘The stock?’
‘My breeding stock of cattle, sir.’
‘Your cattle asked you to make these purchases?’
Koth and Verveuk laughed.
‘No, no, sir... I had purchased fifty head of breeding stock from a farm in
the South Uvege two years before. Cosican Red-flank. Do you know the
breed, sir?’
Menderef looked back at us, playing to the gallery with raised eyebrows.
Verveuk laughed again. ‘I am not on first name terms with cattle, Pridde.’
‘They’re good stock, the best. Certificated by the Administratum Officio
Agricultae. I was hoping to breed from them and establish a commercial
herd for my combine.’
‘I see. And?’
‘They sickened, over winter. None would carry to term. The things they
whelped were still-born... such things... I had to burn them. I asked the
Ministorum for a blessing, but they refused. Said it was a failing in my
stockmanship. I was desperate. I had sunk a lot of capital into the herd, sir.
Then this apothecary told me...’
‘Told you what?’
‘That it was the warp. Said the warp was in the feed and the land, the
very meadows. She said I could cure the trouble if I followed her guidance.’
‘She suggested you used rural warpcraft to mend your ailing cattle?’
‘She did.’
‘And you thought that was a good idea?’
‘As I said, I was desperate, sir.’
‘I know you were. But it wasn’t for the cattle, was it? Your wife had
asked you to make the purchases, hadn’t she?’
‘No, sir!’
‘Yes, sir! Your wife, of the Samargue bloodline, desperate to restore
power and vigour to its ailing fortunes!’
‘Y-yes...’
‘Green light, Pridde!’
‘Yes!’
From the documentation and my preparation, I already knew that House
Samargue was the biggest game we were after on Durer. To his credit,
Verveuk had suggested we begin with Pridde, a minor player, no more than
an accomplice really, and use him as a lever to open up the noble family. On
the basis of his testimony, the corruption of the ancient House would be
easy to force out into the open.
Menderef continued his questioning for over an hour and, to tell the truth,
it made for captivating theatre. When the Minster bell sounded nones, he
cast a subtle glance at me to indicate there was no point pressing Pridde
further for the time being. A break, with opportunity for the defendant to
pace and worry, would serve us well for the day’s second session.
‘We will suspend the hearing for a brief term,’ I declared. ‘Bailiffs,
conduct the accused to the cells. We will resume at the chime, an hour from
now.’
I was hungry and stiff. Lunch offered a decent respite, even if I would
have to tolerate Verveuk.
BASTIAN VERVEUK WAS thirty-two standard years old and had been an
inquisitor for seven months. He was a fresh-faced boy, he seemed to me, of
medium height with a centre-parted bowl of heavy blond hair and slightly
hooded, earnest eyes. He looked like he was yearning all the time. Yearning
and swept up in some spiritual rapture.
He had a brilliantly ordered mind and had doubtlessly served Osma well
as an interrogator. But now his hour had come and he was pushing up the
ranks with immodest ambition. His transfer to Rorken’s staff – for
‘supplementary schooling’ – had probably been the result of Osma losing
patience with him. Osma was like that. Osma was still the same Osma who
had plagued me fifty years before. Except that now he was set to inherit
Orsini’s role as Grand Master of the Inquisition, Helican sub-sector. Grand
Master Orsini was dying and Osma was his chosen heir. It was just a matter
of time.
Rorken was dying too, if the rumours were true. Soon, I would be
friendless in the high ranks of the Ordos Helican.
Thanks to Rorken’s infirmity, I had acquired Verveuk. He was simply a
burden I had to carry. His manner, his yearning, his bright eagerness; his
damned questions.
I STOOD IN the Minster’s warm sacristy, sipping wine and eating thick
seed-bread, smoked fish and a strong, waxy cheese locally produced in the
Uvege. I was chatting with Rassi, a pale, quiet senior inquisitor from the
Ordo Malleus who had become a firm friend in recent years despite his
association with the caustic Osma.
‘A month, you think, Gregor?’
‘For this, Poul? Two, maybe three.’
He sighed, toying his fork around his plate, his silver-headed cane tucked
under his arm to free his hands. ‘Maybe six if they each bring a bloody
pardoner, eh?’
We laughed. Koth slid past us to refill his glass and cast us a nod.
‘Don’t look now,’ Rassi murmured, ‘but your fan club is here.’
‘Oh, crap. Don’t leave me with him!’ I hissed, but Rassi had already
moved away. Verveuk slid up beside me. He was balancing a dish of game
terrine, pickles and salted spry that he clearly had no intention of eating.
‘It goes well, I think!’ he started.
‘Oh, very well.’
‘Of course, you must have great experience of these sessions, so you
know better than I. But a good start, would you not say?’
‘Yes, a good start.’
‘Pridde is the key, he’ll turn the lock of House Samargue.’
‘I’m quite sure of it.’
‘Menderef’s work was something, wasn’t it? The cross-exam? So deft, so
well-judged. The way he broke Pridde.’
‘I – uh – expected no less.’
‘Quite something, yes indeed.’
I felt I had to say something. ‘Your choice of Pridde. As the first accused.
Well judged, well... well, a good decision, anyway.’
He looked at me as if I was his one true love and I’d just promised to do
something significant.
‘Lord, I am truly honoured that you say so. I only did what I thought
best. Really lord, to hear that from you, fills my heart with—’
‘Stewed fish?’ I asked, offering him the bowl.
‘No, thank you, lord.’
‘It’s very good,’ I said, slathering my bread with it. ‘Though like so many
fine things in life, you can quite quickly have too much of it.’
He didn’t take the hint. The hint would most likely have to be embossed
on the tip of a hi-ex bolter round and fired up his nose before he’d notice it.
‘I feel, lord,’ he said, setting his untouched dish aside, ‘that I can learn so
much from you. This is an opportunity that few of my status get.’
‘I can’t fathom why,’ I said.
He smiled. ‘I almost feel I should thank the miserable tumors eating at
my Lord Rorken for this chance.’
‘I feel I owe some sort of payback to them too,’ I muttered.
‘It’s so rare that a – if I may say – veteran inquisitor such as yourself... a
field inquisitor, I mean, not a desk-bound lord... participates in a process
like this and mingles with lesser officers such as me. Lord Rorken has
always spoken so highly of you. There is much I want to ask you, so many
things. I have read up on all your works. The P’Glao Conspiracy, for
example. I have reviewed mat from end to end, and I have so many queries.
And other matters—’
Here it comes, I thought.
And there it came.
‘The daemonhosts. And Quixos. There is, oh, so much in that that
demands the attention of a scholar such as myself. Can you give me
personal insight? Perhaps not now... later... we could dine together and
talk...’
‘Well, perhaps.’
‘The records are so incomplete – or rather, restricted. I yearn to know
how you dealt with Prophaniti. And Cherubael.’
I was waiting for the name. Still, hearing it, I winced.
Cherubael. That’s what they all asked. Every last neophyte inquisitor I
met. That’s what they all wanted to know. Damn their interest. It was over
and done with.
Cherubael.
For one hundred and fifty years, the daemon had plagued my dreams and
made each one a nightmare. For a century and a half, it had been in my
head, a shadow at the horizon of sanity, a softly breathing shape in the dark
recesses of my consciousness.
I had done with Cherubael. I had vanquished it.
But still the neophytes asked, and swirled up the memories again for me.
I would never tell them the truth. How could I?
‘Lord?’
‘I’m sorry, Verveuk, my mind wandered. What did you say?’
‘I said, isn’t that one of your men?’
GODWIN FISCHIG, DRESSED in a long black coat, still powerful and
imposing after all these years, had entered the sacristy by the rear door and
was looking around for me.
I handed my plate and glass to the startled Verveuk and went directly
across to him.
‘I didn’t expect to see you here,’ I whispered, drawing him aside. ‘Not
really my thing, but you’ll thank me for busting in.’ ‘What is it?’
‘Paydirt, Gregor. You’ll never guess in a hundred centuries who we’ve
turned up.’ ‘Presuming we don’t have a million years, Fischig, tell me.’
Thuring,’ he said. ‘We’ve found Thuring.’
VENGEANCE, IN MY opinion, is never an adequate motive for an
inquisitor’s work. I had sworn to make Thuring pay for the death of my old
friend Midas Betancore, of course, but the eighty years since Midas’s
murder had been filled to distraction with more weighty and more pressing
cases. There had not been time or opportunity to spare the months – perhaps
years – required to hunt Thuring down. He was... not worth the effort.
At least, that is what Lord Rorken always counselled me when I brought
the matter up. Fayde Thuring. An inconsequential player in the shadow-
world of heresy that lurks within Imperial society. A nothing who would ran
foul of justice soon enough all by himself. Undeserving of my attention.
Not worth the effort.
Indeed, for a long time, I had believed him dead. My agents and
informants had kept me appraised of his activities, and early in 352.M41 I
had learned he had fallen in with an out-world fraternity of Chaos called the
Hearthood, or sometimes the Chimes of the World Clock. They practised a
stylised worship of the Blood God, in the form of a local tribe’s minor
swine-deity called Eolkit or Yulquet or Uulcet (the name differed in every
source consulted) and for some months had plagued the crop-world
Hasarna. Their cult-priest took the ceremonial guise of the swine-butcher or
culler who, in older times, had travelled between the communities of
Hasarna at the end of each autumn, slaughtering the livestock ready for the
cold months. It was an old tradition, one that mixed ritual blood-letting with
the dying of the calendar year, and is common throughout the Imperium.
Pre-Imperial Terra had just such a myth once, called the Hallows, or the
Eve of Hallowing.
The cult leader was Amel Sanx, the Corruptor of Lyx, reappearing for the
first time after a century of hiding to spread his poisons. Sanx was so
notorious a heretic that once it became known he was involved, the initial
Inquisitorial efforts to prosecute the Hearthood multiplied a hundredfold
and a kill-team of the Adepta Sororitas led by Inquisitor Aedelorn
obliterated them in a raid on Hasarna’s northern capital.
In the aftermath, it was discovered that Sanx had already sacrificed most
of his minor followers as part of a ritual that Aedelorn’s raid had
interrupted. Thuring was one of his second tier of trusted acolytes in the
Hearthood. His body was listed as amongst the ritual victims.
Midas’s killer was dead. Or so I had thought until that moment in the
sacristy of Eriale’s Minster.
‘Are you sure of this?’
Fischig looked at me with a shrug as if I should have trouble doubting his
words. ‘Where is he?’ ‘That’s the part you’ve going to love. He’s here.’
THEY HAD TAKEN their places already in the main vault of the Minster by
the time I joined them. House Samargue had brought out a militant
advocate to answer for them and already he was strenuously trying to
establish the fragility of Udwin Pridde’s testimony.
I slammed my fist on the table to shut him up.
‘Enough! This Examination is suspended!’
My fellow inquisitors swung round to look at me.
‘It’s what?’ asked Menderef.
‘Until further notice!’ I added.
‘But—’ Koth began.
‘Gregor—?’ asked Rassi. ‘What are you doing?’
‘This is highly irregular—’ Verveuk said.
‘I know!’ I told him, right into his face. He flinched.
‘My lord chief examiner,’ asked the Samargue’s advocate, stepping
towards the bench nervously, ‘may I presume to ask when this hearing
might recommence?’
‘When I’m ready,’ I snarled. ‘When I’m good and ready.’
TWO
Betancore, blood up.
Fischig’s briefing.
Arming for battle.
IT CAUSED QUITE a stir. What am I saying? Of course it caused quite a stir.
Crowds quickly gathered outside the Minster in the bright afternoon
sunshine. The archivists and pamphleteers who had been dozing in the
public gallery scampered off to promulgate the news. Even the confessors
and preachers who had been wandering the streets, lambasting the common-
folk with bilious sermons against heresy, followed the crowds to the
Minster square.
‘You can’t just suspend a Court of Examination!’ Menderef raged at me.
I shoved him aside and strode on down the long aisle towards the main
doors of the Minster. Bequin and Fischig were in step with me, and Aemos
scurried to catch up.
‘You say “here”, what do you mean?’ I asked Fischig, dragging off my
fur-trimmed cloak and my chain of office and tossing them onto a pew.
‘Miquol,’ he said. ‘It’s an island in the northern polar circle. About two
hours’ transit time.’
‘Eisenhorn! Eisenhorn!’ Menderef yelled behind me, a twitter of agitated
voices around him.
‘You sure it’s him?’
‘I’ve reviewed Godwin’s findings,’ snapped Bequin. ‘It’s Thuring, all
right. I’d put money on it.’
We reached the end of the Minster’s nave and were crossing towards the
entrance arch and daylight. A hand caught my sleeve.
I turned. It was Rassi.
‘What are you doing, Gregor? This is holy work you’re abandoning.’
‘I’m not abandoning anything, Poul. Didn’t you hear me? I’m suspending
it. This Examination is all about feeble little recidivists and their ungodly
habits. I’m set on a true heretic.’
‘Really?’
‘Come along if you don’t believe me.’
‘Very well.’
As I pressed on through the great doorway, Rassi turned and intercepted
Koth and Menderef. He shouted down their objections. ‘I’m going with
him,’ I heard him say to them. ‘I trust Eisenhorn’s judgment. If he was
wrong to break the court here, I’ll testify to that when I return.’
We were out in the daylight. Mobs of civilians gazed at us, some
shielding their eyes from the sun’s glare where the blossom-heavy trees of
the square failed to shade them.
‘Medea?’ I asked Fischig.
‘Already called in. I presumed; I hope that’s all right.’
‘Does she know?’
Fischig glanced at Bequin and Aemos. ‘Yes. I couldn’t hide it from her.’
Almost on cue, Medea’s voice crackled over my vox-link. ‘Aegis
descending, the Armour of God, by two,’ she reported in Glossia code, her
voice hard-edged and bitter.
‘Damn it!’ I said. ‘Clear the square!’
Fischig and Bequin ran forward into the crowd. ‘Clear the area!’ Bequin
yelled. ‘Come on, move! Move now!’ Fischig bellowed. No one obeyed.
Fischig pulled out his handgun and fired into the air. Shrieking, the
crowd surged back and streamed away down the approach streets.
Just in time.
My gun-cutter, all four hundred and fifty tonnes of it, swung in over the
roof of the Eriale Municipal Library and descended on wailing thrusters
into the Minster square. The downwash blew the blossom off the trees and
filled with air with petals like confetti.
I felt the ground shake as the vessel set down hard. Flagstones cracked
under the steel pads of the extended landing struts. Casements around the
square shattered. The trees in the square billowed furiously in the outrush of
the jets. The nose ramp whined open.
I hurried up the ramp with Aemos and Bequin, pausing to beckon Rassi
aboard. Leaning on his cane, he walked more slowly than us. Fischig waited
at the foot of the ramp, sternly ushering in the other members of my retinue
who had been stationed in the vicinity of the Minster. Kara Swole, who had
been monitoring the crowd from a caffeine house opposite the library.
Duclane Haar, whose sniper-variant long-las had been tracking the traffic
around the Minster’s main door from the roof of the Administratum’s tithe
barn. Bex Begundi, who had been posing as a homeless mutant begging for
alms in the porch of Saint Becwal’s Chapel, his pistols concealed under his
pauper’s bowl.
Fischig pulled them all in and then ran up the ramp, hauling on the lever
that slammed the ramp shut.
Almost immediately, the gun-cutter rose again, puffing out a cloud of
blossom.
In the entry bay, I took a quick head count.
‘Verveuk! What are you doing here?’
‘As my Lord Rorken instructed,’ he said, ‘I go where you go, lord.’
WE GAINED ALTITUDE, climbing into the stratosphere for the transit north.
My own people knew their places and tasks, but I pulled Kara Swole aside
and told her to make sure Rassi and Verveuk were comfortable. ‘Inquisitor
Rassi deserves every courtesy, but don’t give Verveuk a millimetre. Don’t
let him get in the way.’
Kara Swole was a well-muscled acrobat-dancer from Bonaventure who
had assisted one of my investigations three years before and had enjoyed
the experience so much she’d asked to join my retinue permanently. She
was small and lithe, with very short red hair, and her muscular frame made
her look almost stocky, but she was nimbler and more agile than just about
anyone I had ever met and had a genuine flair for surveillance. She’d
become a valued member of my team and she’d told me more than once
that the employment I offered her was infinitely preferable to her previous
life in the circus arenas of her homeworld.
Kara glanced in Verveuk’s direction. ‘He looks like a ninker to me,’ she
murmured. ‘Ninker’ was her insult of choice, a slang term from the circus
Creole. I’d never had the heart to ask her what it meant.
‘I believe you’re right about that,’ I whispered back. ‘Keep an eye on
him... and make sure Rassi’s happy. When we get to the destination, I want
you and Haar guarding them with your lives.’
‘Understood.’
I gathered Fischig, Bequin, Aemos, Haar and Begundi around the chart
table for a briefing, and also summoned Dahault, my astropath.
‘All right... how did you find him?’
Fischig smiled. He was obviously pleased with himself. ‘The audit turned
him up. At least, it turned up some appetising clues that made me look
harder and find him. He’d been operating in three of the northern seaports,
and also in the capital. I couldn’t believe it at first. I mean, we thought he
was dead. But it’s him.’
An audit was part of my standard operating practice, and I’d set one
going the moment Lord Rorken prevailed on me to conduct the
Examination, four months earlier. Under Fischig’s leadership, a large part of
my support staff – over thirty specialists – had gone ahead to Durer to carry
it out. The purpose of an audit was twofold. First, to review and recheck the
cases to be presented for Examination to make sure we weren’t wasting our
time and that we were in possession of all the relevant data. It wasn’t that I
didn’t trust Lord Rorken’s preparation, I just like to be certain about what
I’m prosecuting. Secondly, it was to investigate the possible existence of
heretical cases that might have been overlooked by the Examination. I was
going to be devoting a lot of my time and resources to this clean up of
Durer, and I wanted to make sure I was being thorough. If there was other
recidivism here, I wanted to root it out at the same time.
Fischig and the audit team had made a virtual fingertip search of the
planetary records, cross-checking even minor anomalies against my
database. It proved that Rorken’s preparatory work had been excellent, for
very little turned up.
Except Fayde Thuring. Fischig had first discovered some off-world
financial transactions that flagged because they linked to merchant accounts
on Thracian Primaris that Thuring had been associated with twenty years
earlier. Fischig had backtracked painstakingly through shipping registers
and accommodation listings and had lucked upon some footage recorded by
a mercantile company’s security pict. The man captured digitally by the
pict-recorder bore a striking similarity to Fayde Thuring.
‘As far as we can make out,’ said Fischig, Thuring’s been on Durer for
about a year. Arrived aboard a free trader last summer and took up
residence in Haynstown on an eighteen month merchant’s visa. Uses the
name Illiam Vowis and claims to be a dealer in aeronautical engineering.
Not short of cash or connections. Most of the business seems legit, though
he’s been buying up a lot of machine parts and tooling units and hiring on a
fair number of local tech-adepts. From the outside, it looks like he’s setting
up a repair and servicing outfit. What he’s actually doing is not yet clear.’
‘Has he purchased or rented any workspace property?’ asked Begundi.
‘No. That’s one of the discrepancies,’ Fischig looked up at me. ‘He keeps
moving around. Difficult to track. But four days ago, I got a good lead that
he was in the northern seaport, Finyard. So I sent Nayl to get a proper look.’
Harlon Nayl, a long serving member of my cadre and an ex-bounty
hunter, was one of my finest. ‘What did he find?’
‘He was too late to catch Thuring. He’d already gone, but Nayl got into
the hotel suite he had been using before their housekeeping could clean it
up, and got enough hair and tissue fibres to run a gene-scan against the
samples we hold on file. Perfect match. Illiam Vowis is Fayde Thuring.’
‘And you say he’s now on a polar island?’
Fischig nodded. ‘Nayl took off after Thuring, found out he had arranged
passage to this place Miquol. Used to be a PDF listening station there, years
ago, but it’s uninhabited now. We don’t know what he’s doing there, or even
if he’s been there before. Nayl should have reached the island himself by
now. He hasn’t checked in, but the magnetosphere is wild as hell up near
the pole, so comms are out. Long-range, anyway.’
‘This is excellent work, old friend,’ I told Fischig, and he smiled
appreciatively. Godwin Fischig, once a chastener in the arbites of Hubris
and a law enforcer of considerable ability, was one of my real veterans.
He’d served at my side for fifteen decades now, for as long as Alizebeth
Bequin.
Only Aemos had been with me longer. The three of them were my rock,
my foundation, the cornerstones of my entire operation. And they were my
friends. Aemos provided wisdom and an unimaginably vast resource of
knowledge. Bequin was an untouchable, and ran an academy of similarly
gifted individuals called the Distaff. They were my greatest weapon, a corps
of psychically blank individuals who could be used to block even the most
powerful psykers. Bequin was also my emotional rudder. I confided in her
more than the others and looked to her for support when I was troubled.
Fischig was my conscience. He was an imposing man with an age-
grizzled face that was now quite jowly. A thin down of grey hair covered
his scalp where once he had been blond. The scar under his milky eye had
gone pink and glossy over time. Fischig was a formidable warrior and had
gone through some of the worst times at my side. But there was none more
single-minded than he, none so pure... puritanical, if you will. Good and
evil, Law and Chaos, humanity and the warp... they were simple, black and
white distinctions for him. I admired that so. Time, experience and incident
had greyed my attitudes somewhat. I depended on Fischig to be my moral
compass.
It was a role he seemed happy to perform. I think that’s why he had
stayed with me so long, when by now he could have become a
commissioner of arbites, a divisional prefect, maybe even a planetary
governor. Being the conscience of one of the sub-sector’s most senior
inquisitors was a calling that gave him satisfaction.
I wondered sometimes if Fischig regretted the fact that I had never
sought higher office in the Inquisition. I suppose, given my track record and
reputation, I could have become the lord of an ordo by now, or at least been
well on my way. Lord Rorken, who had become something of a mentor to
me, had often expressed his disappointment that I had not taken up the
opportunities he had offered to become his heir. He had been grooming me
for a while as successor to the control of the Ordo Xenos, Helican sub. But I
had never fancied that kind of life. I was happiest in the field, not behind a
desk.
Of all of them, Fischig would have benefitted most if I had followed that
kind of course. I could well imagine him as the commander-in-chief of the
Inquisitorial Guard Helican. But he had never expressed any hint of
unhappiness in that regard. Like me, he liked the challenge of field work.
We made a good team, for a long time. I’ll never forget that, and despite
what fate was to bring, I’ll always thank the God-Emperor of mankind for
the honour of working alongside him for as long as I did.
‘AEMOS,’ I SAID, ‘perhaps you’d like to review Fischig’s data and see if
you can make any further deductions. I’m interested in this island. Punch up
the data, maps, archives. Tell me what you find.’
‘Of course, Gregor,’ Aemos said. His voice was very thin and reedy, and
he was more hunched and wizened than ever. But knowledge still absorbed
him, and I think it nourished him in the way that food or wealth or duty or
even love kept other men going way past their prime.
‘Fischig will assist you,’ I said. ‘And perhaps Inquisitor Rassi too. I want
a workable plan of operations in—’ I checked my chronometer ‘—sixty
minutes. I need to know everything it is possible or pertinent to know
before we hit the ground. And I want a positive, uncomplicated plan of
what we do when we get there. Alizebeth?’
‘Gregor?’
‘Get in contact with as many of our specialists here on Durer as you can
find and get them moving in to support us. Distaff especially. I don’t care
how long it takes or what it costs. I want to know we have solid backup
following us.’
She nodded graciously. She was a brilliant man-manager. Bequin was
still as demure and beautiful as the day I had met her, a century and a half
before, a spectacular testament of the way Imperial science can counter the
effects of aging. Only the faintest creases in the corners of her eyes and lips
betrayed the fact that she was not a stunning woman in her late thirties.
Lately, she had taken to walking rather regally with a shoulder-high ebony
cane for support, claiming that her bones were old, but I believed that to be
an affectation designed to reinforce her very senior and matriarchal role.
Only when I looked into her eyes could I see the distances of age. Her
life had been hard and she had witnessed many terrible things. There was a
sort of wistful pain in the depths of her gaze, a profound sadness. I knew
she loved me, and I loved her as much as any being I had ever known. But
long ago, mutually, we had set that aside. I was a psyker and she was an
untouchable. Whatever the sadness we both felt because of our denied love,
being together would have been so much more agonising.
‘Dahault...’
‘Sir?’ the astropath answered smartly. He had been with me for twenty
years, by far the longest stretch any astropath had managed in my employ.
They wear out so quickly, in my experience. Dahault was a vital, burly man
with a spectacular waxed moustache that I believe he grew to compensate
for his shaved head. He was certainly powerful and able, and had taken to
my regime of work well. Only in the past few years had he started to show
the signs of psychic exhaustion – the shallow, drawn skin, the haunted look,
the aphasia. I dearly hoped I would be able to retire him on a pension before
his calling burned out his mind.
‘Check ahead,’ I told him. ‘Fischig says the magnetosphere is blocking
vox traffic, but Thuring may be using astropaths. See what you hear.’
He nodded and shuffled away to his compact, screened cabin under the
bridge to connect his skull-plugs to the astrocommunication network.
I turned last to Bex Begundi and Duclane Haar. Haar was an ex-Imperial
Guard marksman from the 50th Gudrunite Rifles, a regiment I had an old
association with. Of medium build, he wore a matt anti-fleet bodyglove, the
cap-pin of his old outfit dangling round his neck on a cord. He had lost a leg
in action on Wichard, and been invalided out of service. But he was as good
a shot with the sniper-variant long-las as Duj Husmaan, now long gone and
in a manner I sorely regretted.
Haar was clean shaven and his brown hair was as neatly trimmed as it
had been in the days of parade ground drill. He wore an optic target
enhancer that clamped around the side of his skull, looping over his ear, and
could drop the articulate arm of the foresight down over his right eye for
aiming. He preferred the enhancer to a conventional rifle-mounted scope,
and with his tally of clean hits, I wasn’t about to argue.
Bex Begundi was a rogue, in the strictest sense of the term. A desperado,
old Commodus Voke would have called him. An outlaw, scammer, con-
artist and low-life, born in the slums of Sameter, a world I had no love for
as I’d once left a hand there. He was one of Harlon Nayl’s recruits –
possibly one of his intended bounties who had been offered a life or death
choice – and had joined my team six years before. Begundi was
unspeakably cocky and prodigiously skilled with handguns.
Tall, no more than thirty-five years old, he was not exactly handsome but
oozed a devastating charisma. He was dark haired, a jet-black goatee
perfectly trimmed around his petulant smile, with hard cheekbones, and
corpse-white skin dye contrasting with the wipes of black kohl under his
dangerously twinkling eyes, as was the gang-custom of the slums. He was
dressed in a leather armour body jacket embroidered with rich silk thread
and preposterous panels of sequins. But there was nothing remotely comical
about the paired Hecuter autopistols holstered under his arms in a custom-
made, easy-draw rig.
‘We’re in for a fight when we get down, make no mistake,’ I told them.
‘Rockin’ good news,’ said Begundi with a hungry smile.
‘Just point me at the target, sir,’ said Haar.
I nodded, pleased. ‘No showboating, you hear me? No grandstanding.’
Begundi looked hurt. ‘As if!’ he complained.
‘Actually, I was thinking of you, Haar,’ I replied. Haar blushed. He had
proved to be extremely... eager. A killer’s instinct.
‘You can trust me, sir,’ he said.
‘This is important. I know it’s always important, but this is... personal.
No screw ups.’
‘We’re after the guy who popped Dee’s dad, right?’ asked Begundi.
Dee. That’s what they called Medea Betancore, my pilot.
‘Yes, we are. For her sake, stay alert.’
I WENT UP into the cockpit. The high-altitude cloudscape was sliding past
outside. Medea was flying like a daemon.
She was just over seventy-five years old, just a youngster still. Stunning,
volatile, brilliant, sexy, she had inherited her late father’s pilot skills as
surely as she had inherited his dark Glavian skin and fine looks.
She was wearing Midas’s cerise flying jacket.
‘You need to stay focused, Medea,’ I said.
‘I will,’ she replied, not looking up from the controls.
‘I mean it. This is just a job.’
‘I know. I’m fine.’
‘If you need to stand down, it can be arranged.’
‘Stand down?’ She snapped the words and looked round at me sharply,
her large, brown eyes wet with angry tears. ‘This is my father’s killer we’re
going for! All my life I’ve waited for this! Literally! I’m not going to stand
down, boss!’
She had never known her father. Fayde Thuring had murdered Midas
Betancore a month before her birth.
‘Fine. I want you with me. I’d like you with me. But I will not allow
emotion to cloud this.’
‘It won’t.’
‘I’m glad to hear it.’
There was a long silence. I turned to go.
‘Gregor?’ she said softly.
‘Yes, Medea?’
‘Kill the bastard. Please.’
IN MY CABIN, I made my preparations. The soft robes I had been wearing
as lord chief examiner went in favour of an armoured bodyglove, steel-
reinforced knee boots, a leather jacket and a heavy storm coat with
armoured shoulder panels. I pinned my badges of office on my chest, my
Inquisitorial rosette at my throat.
I selected my three primary weapons from the safe: a large calibre bolt
pistol, the runestaff handmade for me by Magos Bure of the Adeptus
Mechanicus, and the curved, pentagram-engraved force sword that I had
commissioned to be forged from the broken half of the Carthaen war-blade,
Barbarisater.
I blessed each one.
I thought of Midas Betancore, dead nearly a century now. Barbarisater
purred in my hands.
THREE
Miquol.
Durer PDF listening station 272.
The turnabout.
MIQUOL WAS A vast volcanic slab jutting from the black waters of the
polar ocean, sixteen kilometres long and nine wide. From the air, it looked
bleak and lifeless. Sheer cliffs a hundred metres high edged its shape but its
interior was a ragged desert of crags and rock litter.
‘Life signs?’ I asked.
Medea shrugged. We weren’t picking anything up, but it was obvious
from the jumping, hiccupping displays that the magnetics were playing hell
with our instruments.
‘Shall I set down topside?’ she asked.
‘Maybe,’ I said. ‘Bring us around for another pass to the south first.’
We banked. Cloud cover was low, and banks of chill fog swathed the
island’s gloomy sprawl.
Fischig joined us in the cockpit.
‘You said there was an old facility here?’ I said.
He nodded. ‘A listening station, used by the Planetary Defence Force in
the early years after the liberation. Been out of use for a couple of decades
now. It’s high up in the interior. I’ve got a chart-ref.’
‘What’s that?’ Medea asked, pointing down at the southern cliffs. Down
below, we could make out some derelict jetties, landing docks and prehab
sheds clustered on a sea-level crag at the foot of the cliff. Some kind of
vertical trackway, a row of rusting pylons, ran from the back of some of the
larger sheds up the face of the cliff.
‘That’s the landing facility,’ said Fischig. ‘Used to serve the island when
there were still PDF staffers stationed here.’
‘There’s a sea-craft down there,’ I said. ‘Fairly large.’
I looked across at Medea. ‘Put down there. The crag there beside the
sheds. The cliffs will keep the cutter out of sight too.’
IT WAS BITINGLY cold, and the air was dank with fog and sea-spray.
Aemos and Dahault stayed with Medea aboard the cutter and the rest of us
ventured out. On the ramp, I turned to Verveuk. ‘You stay aboard too,
Bastian.’
He looked dismayed. That damned yearning look again.
‘I’d like to feel I have someone I can count on watching the cutter,’ I lied
smoothly.
His expression changed immediately: pride, self-importance.
‘But of course, lord!’
WE CROSSED THE crag in the lee of the high cliffs towards the prefabs.
They were old-pattern Imperial modulars, shipped in and bolted together.
Time and weather had much decayed them. Windows were boarded and the
fibre-ply walls were rotten and patched. Rain and spray had scrubbed away
most of the surface paint and varnish, but in places you could just make out
the faded crest of the Durer PDF.
Haar and Fischig led the way. Haar had his long-las raised to his
shoulder, his fore-sight dropped into place, hunting for targets as he paced
forward. Fischig carried a las-rifle in one hand. A motion tracker unit was
buckled over his left shoulder, whirring and ticking as it subjected Fischig’s
immediate vicinity to invisible waves of vigilance. Rassi and I were close
behind them, with Alizebeth, Kara and Begundi at the rear.
Fischig pointed to the vertical trackway we had seen from the air. ‘Looks
like a cable-carriage or a funicular railway. Runs up to the cliff top.’
‘Functional?’ Rassi inquired.
‘I doubt it, sir,’ said Fischig. ‘It’s old and hasn’t been maintained. I don’t
like the look of those cables,’ The main lifting lines were heavy-gauge
hawsers, but they swung slackly in the wind between the pylons and
showed signs of fraying. ‘There are stairs, though,’ Fischig added. ‘Right
up the cliff alongside the track.’
We crossed to the jetties. They too were badly decayed. Rusting chains
slapped and clanked with the sea-swell. The craft moored there was a
modern, ocean-going ekranoplane, twenty metres long and sleekly grey.
Stencils on the hull told us it was a licensed charter vessel from Finyard,
presumably the vessel Thuring had hired to bring him here.
There was no sign of crew, and the hatches were locked down. There
wasn’t even a hint of standby automation.
‘Want me to force entry?’ asked Kara.
‘Maybe—’ I was interrupted by a shout from Haar. He was standing in
the entrance of the nearest prefab, a docking shed that stood over the water
on stilt legs. Haar gestured inside as I joined him. In the half-light, I could
see four bodies slumped on the duckboards of the dry well. Fischig was
kneeling beside them.
‘Local mariners. Their papers are still in their pockets. Registered
operators from Finyard.’
‘Dead how long?’
Fischig shrugged. ‘Maybe a day? Single shot to the back of the head in
each case.’
‘The crew from the sea-craft.’
He rose. ‘Makes sense to me.’
‘Why didn’t they dump the bodies at sea?’ Haar wondered.
‘Because an ekranoplane is a specialist vehicle and they needed the crew
alive to get them here,’ I suggested.
‘But if they killed them once they were here—’ Haar began.
I was way ahead of him. ‘Then they’re not planning on leaving the
island. Not the way they arrived, at any rate.’
I HAD KARA Swole break into the ekranoplane. There was nothing useful
inside, just a few items of equipment and personal clutter belonging to the
murdered crew. The passengers had taken everything else with them.
The only thing we learned was that Thuring might have as many as
twenty men with him on Miquol, given the ekranoplane’s load capacity and
the number of emergency life jackets.
‘They’ve gone inland,’ I decided. ‘And that’s where we’re going too.’
‘Shall I get Dee to fire up the cutter?’ Begundi asked.
‘No,’ I said. ‘We’ll go in on foot. I want to get as close to Thuring as
possible before he makes us. We can call in the cutter if we need it.’
‘Medea won’t like that, Gregor,’ said Bequin.
I knew that damn well.
I BELIEVED MEDEA deserved every chance to avenge her father.
Vengeance might not be an appropriate motive for an inquisitor, but as far
as I was concerned it was perfectly fine for a headstrong, passionate
combat-pilot.
However, her passion could become a liability. I wanted Thuring taken
cleanly and I didn’t relish the prospect of Medea going off in a blind fury.
Bequin was right, though. Medea really didn’t like it.
‘I’m coming!’
‘No.’
‘I’m coming with you!’
‘No!’ I caught her by the arms and stared into her face. ‘You are not. Not
yet.’
‘Gregor!’ she wailed.
‘Listen! Think about this logic—’
‘Logically? That bastard killed my father an—’
‘Listen! I don’t want the cutter giving us away too early. That means
leaving it here. But I do want the cutter ready to respond at a moment’s
notice, and that means you have to stay here on standby! Medea, you’re the
only one who can fly it!’
She shook off my grip and turned away, gazing at the rolling surge of the
ocean.
‘Medea?’
‘Okay. But I want to be there when—’
‘You will. I promise.’
‘You swear it?’
‘I swear it.’
Slowly, she turned look at me. Her eyes were still bright with hurt.
‘Swear it on your secrets,’ she said.
‘What?’
‘Do it the Glavian way. Swear it on your secrets.’
I remembered this now. The Glavian custom. They considered an oath
most binding if it was sworn against private, personal secrets. In the old
days, I suppose, that meant one Glavian pilot swearing to exchange
valuable technical or navigational secrets with another as an act of faith and
honour. Midas had made me do it once, years before. He’d made me swear
to a three-month sabbatical at a time when I was working too hard. It hadn’t
been possible, because of one case or another, and I’d ended up having to
tell him that I adored Alizebeth and wished with every scrap of my being
that we could be together.
That was the deepest, darkest secret I had been carrying at the time. How
things change.
‘I swear it on my secrets,’ I told her.
‘On your gravest secret.’
‘On my gravest secret.’
She spat on the ground and then quickly licked her palm and held out her
hand. I mirrored her gestures and clasped her hand.
We left her with Aemos, Dahault and Verveuk at the gun-cutter and made
our way up the cliff stairs.
IT WAS RAINING by the time we reached the top, and the last few flights
were treacherously wet. Salty wind flapped in from the sea, gusting into our
coats and clothes.
I was worried about Poul Rassi. Though he didn’t look it, he was over a
century older than me, and the climb left him pale and breathless. He was
relying on his cane more than before.
‘I’m all right,’ he said. ‘Don’t fuss.’
‘Are you sure, Poul?’
He smiled. ‘I’ve been in the courts and privy chambers for too many of
the last few years, Gregor. This is almost an adventure. I’d forgotten how
much I liked this.’ Rassi raised his cane and flourished it ahead of us like a
sabre. ‘Shall we?’
WE ADVANCED INTO the hinterland of Miquol. Fischig had an auspex
locked off on the old PDF base, so we headed for that as a place to start.
The sky was the luminous, hazy white of a blown valve-screen. Stripes of
fog clung to the ground like walls of smoke. The rain was constant. The
landscape was a mix of jagged upthrust outcrops and steep, shadowy
valleys littered with scree. Boulders were scattered all around, some the size
of skulls, some the size of battle tanks. The rock was dark, almost the
colour of anthracite, and occasionally it was splintered out in cascades of
volcanic glass. A forbidding, grey place. A monochrome world.
After two hours, we passed a rust-eaten tower of girders capped by
sagging, corroded alloy petals that had once been a communications dish.
One of the peripheral receivers of the listening station.
‘We’re close,’ said Fischig, consulting his auspex. ‘The PDF base is over
the next headland.’
DURER PDF LISTENING station 272 had been established shortly after the
planet’s liberation by the newly formed Planetary Defence Force as part of
a global overwatch program. Through it, and around three hundred facilities
like it, the Durer PDF had been able to maintain a round-the-clock watch of
orbital traffic, local shipping lane activity and even general warp space
movements, providing the planet with an early warning network and
gathering vital tactical intelligence for this part of the sub-sector in general.
Over a period of twenty years following the annexation of the territory, the
network had gradually been run down, eventually supplanted by a string of
scanner beacons in high orbit and a slaved sub-net of sensor buoys seeded
throughout the Durer system.
The PDF had finally vacated the obsolete station some three decades
before, undoubtedly grateful that they would never have to tolerate a tour of
duty on this harsh rock again.
The station lay on the shore of a long polar lake, framed by ragged infant
mountains to the north. It was an exposed place, bitten by the sub-zero
winds. The lake, smudged with mist, was a flat, gleaming mirror of oil-dark
water, its glassy surface occasionally disturbed by a flurry of wind ripples.
On the grey shore there were eighteen longhouses arranged in a grid
around a drum-like generator building, a hangar large enough to shelter
several troop carriers or orbital interceptors, a cluster of store barns, a
number of machine shops, a small Ecclesiarchy chapel, a central command
post with adjoining modules arranged in a radial hub and the main dish
array.
All of it had succumbed to the feral ministry of the environment. The
modules and prefabs were aged and dilapidated, windows covered with
boards. The roadways between the prefabs were littered with rusting trash:
old fuel drums, the carcasses of trucks, piles of flaking storm shutters. The
vast main dish, angled towards the west, was a skeleton of its former self,
just a hemisphere described by bare girders and dangling struts. In the black
mirror of the lake, its reflection seemed like that of a giant, bleached
ribcage. But it looked to me more like the ruins of an orrery, just the
shattered remains of the central solar ball, permanently peering in the
direction it had last been turned.
HUGGING COVER, WE made our way onto the cold shore and crossed the
short distance to the nearest longhouse. We all had weapons drawn by now,
except Begundi. Fischig’s auspex and motion tracker both indicated life-
signs close by, but how close they weren’t telling. Thanks to the damn
magnetic interference we were forewarned but as good as blind.
WE WERE NON-VERBAL by now. I gestured and sent Haar ahead down the
left side of the street, Fischig down the right. I’d have liked to deploy Kara
too, but she was keeping to my orders and sticking close to Rassi, her
assault weapon tight in her gloved hands. Rassi, his sombre, fur-trimmed
robes flapping in the wind, had produced a multi-barrel pepperpot handgun
of exotic manufacture.
Bequin hung back from me so that her psychic deadness wouldn’t
conflict with my mind. For the trek across Miquol she had changed her
formal gown for a quilted body suit and stout boots, with a hooded cloak of
dark green, embroidered velvet wrapped around her. I noticed she had also
left her long walking cane aboard the cutter. She had drawn a slim, long-
nosed micro-las that I had given her on her hundred and fiftieth birthday. It
had pearl-inlaid grips and was a custom masterpiece, an antique made by
Magos Nwel of Gehenna.
The pistol suited her. It was slender and elegant and devastatingly potent.
Up ahead, I saw Fischig signal to Haar. Haar knelt down and gave the big
man some cover as he crossed to the back door of the next longhouse. I sent
Begundi forward in support. Begundi still hadn’t drawn his hand cannons
from their shoulder rig, and ran with an easy, loping gait.
Once Begundi had reached him, Fischig slipped inside the longhouse.
There was a pause, and then Begundi went in too.
We waited.
Begundi appeared in the doorway and beckoned to us.
IT WAS GOOD to be out of the damp, though the dark, rot-stinking interior
of the old prefab barrack wasn’t much better. We got inside, and Haar and
Kara stood guard at the doorway, with Begundi covering the front.
Fischig had found something.
Fischig had found someone.
It was an old man. Filthy, wizened, lice-ridden and diseased. He cowered
in the corner, whining each time the beam of Fischig’s hand-lamp probed at
him. If I’d passed him on the streets of Eriale, I’d have taken him for a
beggar and not given him a second look. Out here, though, it was different.
‘Give me the lamp,’ I said. The old man, who seemed more animal than
human, shrank back as I turned the hard white light on him. He was caked
in filth, starving and gripped by fear.
But despite the dirt, I could recognise his robes.
‘Father? Father hierarch?’
He moaned.
‘Father, we’re friends.’ I unclasped my rosette and held it out to show
him.
‘I am Inquisitor Gregor Eisenhorn, Ordo Xenos Helican. We are here in
an official capacity. Don’t be afraid.’
He looked at me, blinking and slowly reached out a dirt-blackened hand
towards the rosette. I let him take it. He looked at it for a long time, his
hands trembling. Then he started to weep.
I waved Fischig and the others back and knelt down beside him.
‘What’s your name?’
‘D-Dronicus.’
‘Dronicus?’
‘Pater Hershel Dronicus, hierarch of the parish of Miquol, blessed be the
God-Emperor of Mankind.’
‘The God-Emperor protects us all,’ I answered. ‘Can you tell me how
you come to be here, father?’
‘I’ve always been here,’ he replied. ‘The soldiers may have gone, but
while there is a chapel here, there is a parish, and so long as there is a parish
then there is a priest.’
By the Golden Throne, this old fellow had lived here alone for thirty
years, maintaining the chapel.
‘They never deconsecrated the ground?’
‘No, sir. And I am thankful. My duty to the parish has given me time to
think.’
‘Go mad, more like,’ Haar muttered.
‘Enough!’ I snapped over my shoulder.
‘Let me see if I understand this right,’ I said to Dronicus. You served here
as a priest and when the PDF abandoned the site, you stayed on and looked
after the chapel?’
‘Yes, sir, that is the sum of it.’
‘What did you live on?’ asked Fischig. That detective brain, looking for
holes in the story.
‘Fish,’ he said. From his astonishingly foul breath, I believed that.
‘Fish... I went down to the landing point once a week and fished,
smoking and storing the catch in the hangar. Besides, the soldiers left a lot
of canned produce. Why? Are you hungry?’
‘No,’ said Fischig, unprepared for the generosity of the question.
‘Why are you hiding in here?’ Bequin asked softly.
Dronicus looked at me as if needing my permission to answer.
‘Go ahead,’ I nodded.
‘They drove me out,’ he said. ‘Out of my hangar. They were mean. They
tried to kill me, but I can run, you know!’
‘I have no doubt.’
‘Why did they drive you out?’ Fischig asked.
‘They wanted the hangar. I think they wanted my fish.’
‘I’m sure they did. Smoked fish, that’s worth something out here. But
they wanted something else, didn’t they?’
He nodded, a bleak look on his face. ‘They wanted the space.’
‘What for?’
‘For their work.’
‘What work?’
‘They are mending their god.’
I glanced sidelong at Fischig.
‘Their god? What god is that?’
‘Not mine, that’s for sure!’ Dronicus exclaimed. Then he suddenly
looked reflective. ‘But it’s a god, nevertheless.’
‘Why do you say that?’ I asked.
‘It’s big. Gods are big. Aren’t they?’
‘Usually.’
‘You said “they”,’ said Rassi, crouching down next to me. ‘Who do you
mean? How many of them are there?’
Rassi’s tone was admirably calm and reassuring, and I could feel the
gentle bow-wake of the psychic influence he was cautiously bringing to
bear. No wonder he had such a great reputation. I almost felt stupid for not
asking such obvious questions.
‘The god-smiths,’ the old priest replied. ‘I do not know their names.
There are nine of them. And also the other nine. And the fourteen others.
And the other five.’
‘Thirty-seven?’ breathed Fischig.
Dronicus screwed up his face. ‘Oh, there’s a lot more than that. Nine and
nine and fourteen and five and ten and three and sixteen...’
Rassi looked at me. ‘Dementia,’ he whispered. ‘He’s able to account for
them only in the groups he’s seen them. He’s not capable of identifying a
whole. They are just numbers of people that he’s seen at various times.’
‘I’m not stupid,’ cut in Dronicus simply.
‘I never said you were, father,’ Rassi replied.
‘I’m not mad either.’
‘Of course.’
The old man smiled and nodded and then, very directly, asked, ‘Do you
have any fish?’
‘BOSS!’ HAAR HISSED suddenly. I rose quickly.
‘What is it?’
‘Movement... thirty metres...’ His fore-sight was twitching as it
downloaded the data. He knelt in the doorway and eased his rifle up to a
firing position.
‘What do you see?’
‘Trouble. Eight men, armed, moving like an infantry formation. Coming
this way.’
‘We must have tripped something on the way in,’ said Begundi.
‘I don’t want a fight. Not yet,’ I looked at the others. ‘Let’s exit that way
and regroup.’
‘We have to take him,’ said Rassi, indicating the old priest.
‘Agreed. Let’s go.’
Begundi opened the far door of the hut and led the way out. Bequin
followed him, then Fischig. Rassi reached out to help the old priest up.
‘Come on, father,’ he said.
Seeing the hand coming for him, Dronicus yelped.
‘Shit! We’re rumbled!’ said Haar. ‘They’re coming!’
Las-fire, bright and furious, suddenly hammered at the doorway and blew
holes through the rotten fibre-ply.
Kara dived down for cover. Haar kept his place and I heard his long-las
crack.
‘One down,’ he said.
Rassi and I hauled the old priest to his feet and bundled him towards the
back exit. Behind us, the long-las cracked again, and was joined by the
chatter of Kara Swole’s assault weapon. Return fire hammered into the side
of the longhouse, perforating the wall.
‘Get him out,’ I told Rassi and ran to the door.
Standing over Kara as she fired, I shot several bolt rounds through the
gaping window. Las-shots seared down the street and burst against the side
of the hut. I got a glimpse of figures in bulky grey combat fatigues
scurrying closer and pausing to unload their lasrifles in our direction.
A sudden thought, true and clear, lanced into my brain. I grabbed Kara
and Haar. ‘Move!’ I howled.
We had made it to the rear door when the grenade took the front off the
hut. The entire doorway area where Haar had been crouching erupted in a
flash of flame and shredded fibre-ply.
The blast-rush blew us out into the street.
Fischig hauled me up.
‘Go! Go!’
Kara was bleeding from a shrapnel wound on her temple and Haar was
dazed. But we ran, dragging them with us, up the muddy roadway towards
the main dish.
Three men in insulated combat armour raced into the street ahead of us,
raising lasrifles.
Begundi’s Hecuter pistols were in his hands faster than any of us could
raise the weapons we already held. He blazed out twin streams of shots, the
shell cases spraying out from the slide-slots of his weapons. All three men
ahead of us lurched back and sprawled.
Begundi ran ahead, chopping down another two as they emerged, his
handguns roaring. Then he dropped suddenly onto his back, rolled round
and blasted another assailant off the roof where he had suddenly appeared.
Five more loomed behind us, breaking out of the rear door we had
escaped through.
Fischig and Kara turned, firing. They dropped three of them. Bequin
brought down the fourth with a single well-placed head-shot. A round from
my bolt pistol knocked the fifth five metres back down the road.
‘Thorn? Desiring Aegis? Pattern oath?’ my vox suddenly squawked.
Medea was monitoring the activity over the vox-link.
‘Negative! Thorn wishes Aegis repose under wing!’ I replied, using
Glossia, the informal private code I shared with my staff.
‘Aegis stirred. The flower of blood.’
‘Aegis repose, by the thrice ignited. As a statue, to the end of Earth.’
‘Gregor! Let me come!’
‘No, Medea! No!’
We were in a serious firefight now. Las-shots and hard rounds whipped in
all directions. Fischig and Haar laid down heavy cover fire. Kara and
Bequin selected targets more particularly and hit most of them. Begundi
blazed away with his matched handguns. I fired carefully, cautiously,
keeping the old priest behind me. Rassi’s fission-lock pepperpot banged and
sparked and hailed lead balls at the enemy. Every few seconds, he raised his
cane and sent forth a drizzle of psycho-thermic flame from the silver tip—
‘Brace yourselves,’ I yelled. ‘You especially, Poul.’
He nodded.
Reveal yourselves! I urged, using the will at full force.
Such a raw outburst would usually have floored all those around me, but
Haar, Begundi and Kara had all been mentally conditioned during rigorous
training to black out my psy-streams. Bequin was untouchable and Fischig
wore a tore that protected him.
Rassi, forewarned, put up a mental wall. The old priest screamed, stood
up and wet himself.
He wasn’t the only one to stand up. Our attackers rose into view, each
one clutching a smoking weapon, each one blinking in dumb confusion.
Begundi, Fischig and I cut them all down in a few, lethal seconds.
Victory.
For a moment.
Suddenly, Dronicus was running away down the street and Rassi was
doubled up by convulsions. I felt it too. A sudden jolt in the background
psionic resonance. Like a painfully bright flash of light.
I staggered back and slammed into the side of the nearest hut. Blood
spurted out of my nose. Begundi and Kara fell to their knees. Haar sat down
hard, sobbing. Even Fischig, protected by his tore, felt it and staggered.
Alizebeth, the only one unmoved, glanced around at us and yelled,
‘What? What is it?’
I knew where it had come from. The hangar. I struggled upright in time
to see the hangar roof quiver and buckle as something broke through it from
inside.
Something huge that smashed entire roof panels out of the way as it got
to its feet.
It must have been lying down in the hangar, I realised. Now it was rising
and activated. What we had felt had simply been the backwash of its mind-
link going live.
With dreadful certainty, I realised that Fayde Thuring was going to be
damn near impossible to stop.
I had made an unbelievable, unforgivable mistake. I had underestimated
him and his resources. He was nothing like the minor warp-dabbler I had
once let slip away.
He had a Titan, Emperor damn him.
He had a Battle Titan.
FOUR
Cruor Vult.
Fleeing the giant.
A terrible long shot.
ITS NAME WAS Cruor Vult. It weighed two and half thousand tonnes and
stood sixty metres tall. Like all the great Warlord-class Battle Titans, it was
a biped, almost humanoid in its proportions. Hooved with immense three-
toed feet of articulated metal, its massive legs supported a colossal pelvic
mount and the great, riveted torso that housed its throbbing atomic furnaces.
Broad shoulders provided ample space for turbo-laser batteries. Beneath the
shoulder armour, the Titan’s arms elevated the machine’s primary weapons:
a gatling blaster as the right fist, a plasma cannon as the left. The head was
comparatively small, though I knew it was large enough to contain the
entire command deck. It was set low down between the shoulders, making
the monster ogrish and hunched.
I have seen Titans before. They are always a terrifying sight. Even the
Imperial Battle Titans are awful to behold. The Adeptus Mechanicus, who
forge and maintain the war machines for the benefit of mankind, regard
them as gods. They are perhaps the greatest mechanical artefacts the human
race has ever manufactured. We have made more powerful things – the
starships that can cross the void, negotiate warp space and reduce
continents to ashes with their ordnance – and we have made more
technically sophisticated things – the latest generations of fluid-core
autonomous cogitators. But we have made nothing as sublime as the Titan.
They are built for war and war alone. They are created only to destroy.
They carry the most potent armaments of any land-based fighting vehicle
anywhere. Only fleet warships can bring greater firepower to bear. Their
image, bulk, their sheer size, is intended to do nothing except terrify and
demoralise a foe.
And they are alive. Not as you or I would understand it, perhaps, but
there is an intellect burning inside the mind-impulse link that connects the
drivers and crew to the Titan’s function. Some say they have a soul. Only
the Priests of Mars, the adepts and tech-mages of the Cult Mechanicus,
truly understand their secrets and they guard that lore ruthlessly.
Perhaps the only thing more terrifying than a Battle Titan is a Chaos
Battle Titan, the infamous metal leviathans of the arch-enemy. Some are
manufactured in the smithies and forges of the warp, their designs copied
and parodied from the Imperial originals, sacrilegious perversions of the
Martian god-machines. Others are ancient Imperial Titans corrupted during
the Great Heresy, traitor legions that have lurked in the Eye of Terror for ten
thousand years in defiance of the Emperor’s will.
Which this was, frankly I cared little. It looked deformed, blistered with
rust, draped with razorwire and covered with blade-studs that sprouted like
thorns. What I first took to be strings of yellow beads hanging from its
shoulders and blade-studs were actually chains of human skulls, thousands
of them. Its metal was a dull, dirty black and inscribed with the unutterable
runes of Chaos. Its head was a leering skull plated in glinting chrome. Its
name was wrought in brass on a placard across its gigantic chest.
It stepped forward. The ground shook. The ruptured roof panels of the
hangar squealed as they tore and caved in around its swinging thighs. It
strode through the fabric of the hangar like a man wading through a stream.
The building’s front burst out and fell away with a tremendous crash as the
Titan broke its way through.
And then it howled.
Great vox-horns fixed to the sides of its skull blared out the berserk war-
cry of the monster. It was so painfully loud, so deep in the infrasonic
register, that it reflexively triggered primal fear and panic in us. The earth
shook even more than it had done under the weight of its footsteps.
It was coming our way. Now it was clear of the hangar, I could see the
long segmented tail it dragged and whipped behind it.
Move! I said, directing my will at my colleagues in the hope of snapping
them into some sort of rational response. Every few seconds, the rock under
our feet vibrated as it took another step.
We started to run through the streets of the deserted station, trying to
keep as much of the buildings as possible between us and it. Our one
advantage was our size. We could evade it by staying hidden.
With a metallic screech of badly lubricated joints, it slowly turned its
head and waist to look in our direction and then stomped heavily round to
follow us. It walked straight through a longhouse, shattering it like
matchwood.
‘It knows where we are!’ Rassi cried, desperately.
‘How can it?’ Haar whined.
Military grade sensors. Heavy-duty auspex. Devices so powerful that
they could overcome the island’s magnetic distortions. This beast had been
made to fight in horrifically inhospitable theatres, resisting toxins,
radiations, vacuums, bombardments. It needed to be able to see and hear
and smell and target in the middle of hell. The local magnetics that had
bested our civilian instruments were nothing to it.
‘It’s so... big...’ Bequin stammered.
Another crash. Another longhouse kicked over and splintered. A squeak
of protesting metal as a derelict troop track was pulverised underfoot.
We turned back, running back almost the other way now, passing south of
the chapel and the command centre. Again, with an echoing grind of
engaging joints, it came about and renewed its inexorable pursuit.
I felt a spasm, a pulse on a psychic level. I was feeling the surge and
flicker of its mind-impulse link.
‘Get down!’ I yelled.
The gatling blaster opened fire. The sound was a single blur of noise. A
huge cone of flaming gases flickered and twitched around the blaster
muzzles.
A storm of destruction rained around us. Hundreds of high-explosive
shells hosed the street, blitzing the fronts of the buildings, pulping them.
Firestorms sucked and rushed down the street. Billions of cinders and
debris scarps sprayed all around. The stench of fyceline was chokingly
strong.
I got up in a blizzard of ash and settling sparks. We were all still alive, if
chronically dazed by the concussive force. Either the Titan’s targeting
systems were off-set, or the crew were still getting used to its operation.
The sensors might be capable of tracking our movement, but the Titan still
had to get its eye in. Perhaps it could only sense us in a general way.
‘We can’t fight that!’ said Fischig.
He was right. We couldn’t. We had nothing. This was so one-sided it
wasn’t even tragic. But we couldn’t run, either. Once we left the cover of
the station’s buildings, we would be in the open and easy targets.
‘What about the gun-cutter?’ blurted Alizebeth.
‘No... no,’ I said. ‘Even the cutter hasn’t got enough kill-power. It might
make a dent, but it wouldn’t stand a chance. That thing would shoot it out
of the sky before it even got close.’
‘But—’
‘No! It’s not an option!’
‘What is then?’ she wanted to know. ‘Dying? Is that an option?’
We were running again, away from the burning zone of devastation. With
another overwhelming blurt of decibels, the blaster cut loose again. A
longhouse and part of the command centre to our right disintegrated in a
volcanic flurry of spinning wreckage and fire. There were walls of flame
everywhere, gusting yellow and bright into the grey gloom.
Begundi led us down a side street between the ends of longhouses,
Fischig and Kara Swole almost carrying the exhausted Rassi. We ducked
down in the shadows against the rotting side wall.
Hiding, we could no longer see the Titan. There was silence, interrupted
only by the crackle of blazing fibre-ply and the creak of prefab frames
slowly slumping.
But I could feel it. I could feel its abhuman mind seething malevolently
through the deepest harmonics of the psyk-range. It was north of us, on the
other side of the chapel and the store barns, waiting, listening.
A vibrating thump. It was moving again. The rate of the footsteps
increased as it picked up speed until the ground no longer had time to stop
shaking between thumps. Pebbles skittered on the ground and loose glass
dislodged from the broken windows of the nearby longhouses.
‘Go!’ growled Fischig. He broke and started to run east across the main
street. The others began to follow his lead.
‘Fischig! Not that way!’ I leapt after him, grabbing him in the middle of
the roadway. There was a groan of tortured metal and the Titan itself
appeared at the end of the street, traversing its mighty upper body to face
us.
Fischig froze in terror. I threw us both forward behind the rusted hulk of
an old PDF troop carrier.
Blaster fire ripped down the street, kicking up a wild row of individual
impacts that pitted the rocky ground, demolished the edge of a barn and
filled the air with greasy flame, smoke and powdered rock.
A flurry of shots sliced through the shell of the troop carrier, splitting its
fatigued armour wide open and hurling rusty shrapnel in all directions. The
force of the hits actually lifted the carrier’s mouldering bulk and spun it
around, end to end. I dragged Fischig behind a longhouse and just
prevented us from being crushed under the lurching metal shape. The
carrier came to rest against the side wall of the prefab, stoving in the wall
panels.
The earthshaking footsteps resumed. The Titan was advancing down the
street. I looked at Fischig. He was dazed and pale. A ragged chunk of
shrapnel had embedded itself in his left shoulder. It would have decapitated
him if it hadn’t been for the motion tracker unit strapped there. As it was,
the tracker was a smouldering wreck and blood poured from the hunk of
metal projecting from his trapezius.
‘Holy Throne,’ he murmured.
I hoisted him up and glanced back across the street. Begundi and Swole
had managed to get everyone else back into cover before the barrage. I
could see them through the smoke, huddled in the shadows.
I raised my free hand and made gestures that were as clear as possible. I
wanted them to back off and regroup. We would have to split up. There was
nowhere we dared cross the open street in either direction.
Fischig and I blundered off in the opposite direction, coming out in a
drain gully behind the row of longhouses where a stream emptied down
through the station to the lake. We crossed it using a small wire-caged
footbridge and then fell into cover on the far side of a machine shop.
‘Where is it?’ Fischig wheezed in pain.
I checked. I could see the huge machine towering above the prefabs two
hundred metres back, shrouded in the black smoke that was roiling up from
its last onslaught. It had reached the old troop carrier and was standing
there. It looked for all the worlds as if the giant war-engine was sniffing the
air.
It turned again suddenly, filling the air with the sound of whirring gears
and clanking joints, and smashed through the longhouse as it moved off
after us.
‘It’s coming this way,’ I told Fischig. We started to run again, across the
levelled rockcrete apron of the machine shop and then down the gently
sloped street towards the command centre.
Fischig had slowed right down. It was gaining on us.
There was a distant, booming roar that echoed around the entire lake
basin. A ball of flame rose into the air from the very western end of the
station area.
‘What the hell was that?’ Fischig growled.
The Titan clearly wanted to know too. It adjusted its path and moved
away from us, striding towards the site of the unexplained blast, oblivious
to the collateral damage it was leaving in its wake.
‘That,’ said a voice behind us, ‘was the best diversion I could come up
with.’
We looked around and there was Harlon Nayl.
NAYL WAS A good friend and a respected member of my team. I hadn’t
seen the old bounty hunter since he had set off for Durer with Fischig’s
party to conduct the audit. He was a big man, dressed as always in a black
combat-armoured bodyglove. With his heavy skull shaved and polished and
his grizzled face, he looked a fierce brute, but there was a grace to his
movements and a nobility to his stature that always set me in mind of
Vownus, the rogue hero of Catuldynus’s epic verse allegory The Once-Pure
Hive. He held a vox-trigger detonator in his hand.
WE FOLLOWED NAYL into the shelter of a storebarn and the bounty hunter
immediately began to field dress Fischig’s wound. The Battle Titan was still
prowling around west of us, investigating the mysterious blast.
‘I tried to raise you on the vox, but the channels were screwed,’ Nayl
said.
‘Magnetics,’ I said. ‘How long have you been here?’
‘Since first light. I rented a speeder to follow Thuring. It’s hidden up in
the hills on the far side of the lake.’
‘What have you found?’ Fischig asked, wincing as Nayl sprayed his
wound with antisept.
‘Apart from the obvious, you mean?’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘Thuring’s got backing. Serious capital support. Maybe a powerful local
cult we don’t know about, more likely an off-world cabal. He’s got
manpower, resources, equipment. When I first arrived, I poked around, got
a glimpse of what was in the hangar... that took my breath away, I can tell
you. Then I “borrowed” one of his men and asked some questions.’
‘Did you get any answers?’
‘A few. He was... trained to resist.’
I knew Nayl’s interrogation techniques were fairly basic.
‘How long did he last?’
‘About ten minutes.’
‘And he told you—’
‘Thuring has known for some time that the Titan was here. Probably
information received from his backers. It seems no one knew that Miquol
was used by the arch-enemy as a Titan pen during the occupation. The
bloody PDF were stationed here for years and never realised what was
hidden just up there in the mountains.’
I peered out of the barn door. The Titan had come about and was
plodding back in our direction. I could taste its bitter psychic anger and feel
the earth quivering under my feet.
‘Harlon!’
He leapt up and came to join me. ‘Damn,’ he hissed, viewing the Titan.
He took out his detonator again, selected a fresh channel and thumbed the
trigger.
There was a flash, a rolling report, and another mass of fire blossomed
from the western shore of the lake. The Titan turned immediately and
stomped towards the fresh blast.
‘It’s not going to fall for that many more times,’ said Nayl.
‘So there was a Titan... that damn thing... abandoned and dormant in the
mountains?’
‘That’s about the size of it. Left behind in the mass retreat, never found
by Imperial liberators. Sealed in a shielded cavern... along with two more
like it.’
‘Three Titans?’ snarled Fischig.
‘They’ve taken this long to get just that one working,’ said Nayl.
‘Thuring’s aboard that thing, commanding it personally. He’s delighted with
his new toy, even though it’s not up to optimum. You’ll notice it’s only used
its solid munition weapon. I don’t think its reactors are generating enough
juice yet to power up its energy batteries.’
‘Lucky us,’ I said.
‘What I can’t tell you is why Thuring is restoring a monster like that.’
There could be many reasons, I thought. He could be doing it on the
behest of his rich sponsors, which seemed likely. He could be intending to
sell it to the highest bidder. There were cult groups in the Ophidian sub-
sector that would love to own that sort of power. He could even be working
for some higher power, perhaps enlisted by the actual legions of the arch-
enemy.
Or he could be doing this for himself. That idea chilled me. Thuring was
evidently a more significant player than I had estimated. He could have
designs of his own, and with a Battle Titan at his command those designs
could be very bloody. He could hold cities to ransom, here on Durer or
elsewhere. He could raze population centres, slaughter millions, particularly
once the turbines of Cruor Vult were operating at full power.
Whatever the truth, the dismal fate of the ekranoplane’s crew told me he
wasn’t intending to leave the island the way he had come in. A bulk lifter
could easily land here, pick up the Titan and be away before the frankly
paltry watch forces of Durer could react. Thuring was planning to leave
here with the Titan. I knew that as a certainty. It didn’t matter where he was
going after that. Imperial blood would be spilled as a result. We had to stop
him.
Which brought me back to my original problem.
How the hell were we going to fight that?
FRANTICALLY, WITH THE Titan now turning back from the second
diversion, I considered the tools at our disposal. It was hard to concentrate,
because the angry flutter of the Titan’s mind link was interfering with my
mind. I suppose that’s what gave me the idea. The desperate idea.
I reached to key my vox link and then paused. The behemoth would
detect vox transmissions effortlessly. Instead, I stretched out with my mind,
trying to find Rassi.
‘Nayl?’ I asked. ‘What’s the most secure structure here?’
‘The chapel,’ he said. ‘It’s reinforced stone.’
I opened my mind fully. Thorn enfolds kin, within a seal, the worshipful
place. If Rassi could hear me, he wouldn’t understand Glossia, but I figured
he’d have the sense to consult the others.
After a long pause, the answer came.
Kin come to thorn, in sealed worship, abrupt.
‘Let’s move!’ I told Nayl and Fischig.
WE REACHED THE chapel first. The dread Titan had begun to stride our
way again by then, but Nayl fired the last of his diversions and distracted it
east.
We tumbled into the ancient church. It was generally stripped bare and
full of slimy black mold. A few remaining wooden pews were sagging with
damp corruption. The double-headed eagle from the altar lay trampled on
the floor. I noticed that its dented wings were polished brightly. Dronicus
had tended this place fervently until Thuring’s men had arrived and
smashed up his diligently maintained shrine. It was a heartbreaking sight.
I bowed to the altar and made the sign of the eagle across my chest with
both hands.
The others arrived in a hurry, weapons drawn, slamming the door shut
behind them: Bequin, Haar, Begundi, Swole and Rassi.
Rassi was panting hard. Bequin was pale. Both Haar and Swole had cuts
and contusions from near misses.
‘You have a plan?’ asked Rassi, almost immediately.
I nodded. ‘It’s a terrible long shot, but I don’t know what else to do.’
‘Let’s hear it,’ said Fischig.
I DO NOT pretend, as I have already reflected, to have any specific
understanding of the workings of a Battle Titan. No man does, unless he be
a priest of Mars or, like Thuring, the owner of illicitly transmitted lore.
Aemos probably knew a thing or two. I knew for certain he had seen
Adeptus Mechanicus mind-impulse units firsthand, for he’d told me as
much, long before, in the cryogenerator chamber of the tomb-vault
Processional Two Twelve on Hubris.
But he was not with me in that chilly, ransacked chapel, nor was a decent
conversation with him viable.
However, I knew enough to understand that the function of a Titan
depended on the connection between man and machine, between the human
brain and the mechanical sentience. That was achieved – miraculously –
through the psychic interface of the mind-impulse unit.
Which meant, in very simple terms, that the root of our problem was
essentially a psychic one. If we could disrupt or, better still, destroy, the
mind link...
‘THIS RUNESTAFF WAS made for me by Magos Geard Bure of the Adeptus
Mechanicus,’ I told Rassi, letting him feel the weight of the weapon. It was
a long, runic steel pole with a cap-piece in the form of a sun’s corona,
fashioned in electrum. The lodestone at the cap’s centre was a skull, a
perfect copy of my own, marked with the thirteenth sign of castigation, that
had been worked from a hyper-dense geode of tele-empathic mineral called
the Lith that Bure had found on Cinchare. It was a psionic amplifier of quite
devastating power.
‘We use it to boost our collaborating minds. Force a way into the
machine’s consciousness.’
‘Indeed. And then?’
I glanced over at Alizebeth. ‘Then Madam Bequin takes hold of the
runestaff and delivers her untouchable blankness into the heart of it.’
‘Will that work?’ Kara Swole asked.
There was a long pause.
Bequin looked at me and then at Rassi. ‘I don’t know. Will it?’
‘I don’t know either,’ I said. ‘But I think it’s the best chance we have.’
Rassi breathed deeply. ‘So be it. I don’t see another hope, not even a
remote one. Let’s get on with it.’
POUL RASSI AND I took the runestaff between us, our hands clamped
around the long haft.
He closed his eyes.
I tried to relax, but the instinctual barriers of self protection that exist in
every mind kept mine from letting go. I didn’t want to get inside that thing.
Even from a distance, it stank of putrid power. It reeked of the warp.
‘Come on, Gregor,’ Rassi whispered.
I concentrated. I closed my eyes. I knew the Titan was treading nearer,
because I could feel the chapel floor shaking.
I tried to let myself go.
It was like clinging to a precious handhold when you are dangling over a
pit of corrosive sludge. I couldn’t bear to submit and slide away. What
waited for me down there was cosmic horror, a broiling mass of filth and
poison that would dissolve my mind, my sanity, my soul.
Chaos beckoned, and I was trying to find the courage to jump into its
arms.
I could feel the sweat dribbling down my brow. I could smell the rotten
odour of the derelict chapel. I could feel the cold steel in my hands.
I let go.
It was worse than anything I could have imagined.
DROWNING. I WAS drowning, face down, in black ooze. The sticky, foetid
stuff was filling my nostrils and my ears, trying to pour like treacle down
into my mouth and choke me. There was no up, no down, no world.
There was just viscous blackness and the unforgettable smell of the warp.
A hand grasped me by the back of the jacket and yanked me up. Air. I
spluttered, puking out filmy strings of phlegm stained black by the ooze.
‘Gregor! Gregor!’
It was Rassi. He stood beside me, knee deep in the warp mud. God-
Emperor, but his mind was strong. I’d have been dead already but for him.
He looked drawn and weak. Warp-induced pustules were spotting his
face and crusting his neck. Blowflies billowed around us, their buzzing
incessant in our ears.
‘Come on,’ he said. ‘We’ve come this far.’ His words came broken up as
he was repeatedly forced to spit out flies that mobbed around his dry lips.
I looked around. The sea of black ooze went on forever. The sky over our
heads was thickly dark, but I realised that the billowing clouds were
impossibly vast swarms of flies, blocking out the light.
Firelights, distant, flashing, reflected across the slime.
We were in the outer reaches of the Chaos Titan’s mind-link.
Swathed in films of ectoplasmic ooze, we struggled forward, holding
each other for support. Rassi was moaning. His psychic self had brought no
cane to support him.
Flames underlit the horizon and the sea of sludge rolled nauseatingly. I
had not encountered a mental landscape this abominable since my first
dreams of Cherubael, years before.
Cherubael.
Just the thought of him in my mind brought the flies rushing around me.
The slime reacted too, popping and bubbling about my knees. I felt a
keening, a sharp need, that filled the polluted air around me.
Cherubael. Cherubael.
‘Stop it!’ wailed Rassi.
‘Stop what?’
‘Whatever you’re thinking about, stop it. The whole world is reacting.’
‘I’m sorry...’ I suppressed the notion of Cherubael in my mind with every
ounce of my will. The tremors subsided.
‘Throne, Gregor. I don’t know what you’ve got in your head, I don’t want
to know...’ said Rassi. ‘But... I pity you.’
We trudged forward, first one of us slipping over, then the other, then one
bringing the other down. The deep slime licked at us, hungry.
Thousands of kilometres ahead of us, a source of power throbbed. I could
dimly make out the silhouette of a man. But it wasn’t a man. It was Cruor
Vult. ‘Blood wills it’, that would be the simplest Low Gothic translation.
The Titan stood there, distant, the master of this psychic realm.
Daemonic forms ghosted around us. Their spectral, screaming faces were
madness to behold. They were like smoke, like shadowplay. They snarled at
us.
Another few hundred metres and images began to flash into my mind.
We were breaking into the edges of the Titan’s memory sphere.
I saw such things.
May the God-Emperor spare me, I saw such things then.
I stood on the brink and peered into the abyss of the Titan’s memories. I
saw cities die in flames. I saw legions of the Imperial Guard incinerated. I
saw Space Marines die in their hundreds, scurrying around my feet like
ants.
I saw planets catch fire and burn to ashes. I saw Imperial Titans, proud
warlords, burst apart and die under the onslaught of my hands.
I saw the gates of the Imperial Palace on Terra through a blizzard of fire.
I saw down through many thousands of years.
I saw Horus, vile and screaming out his wrath.
I saw the whole Heresy played out in front of my eyes.
I saw the Age of Strife, and witnessed first hand the Dark Age of
Technology that preceded it.
I fell, plummeting through history, through the stored memory of Cruor
Vult.
I saw too much. I started to scream.
Rassi slapped me hard around the face.
‘Gregor! Come on now, we are almost there!’
We were at the heart of it all now, frail as whispers. We were in the
bridge of the Titan, seeing the multiple, overlapping spectres of the men
who had commanded it, all sat in the princeps’s throne, all dead.
Daemons crouched on my back, writhed on my shoulders, gnawed at my
ears and cheeks.
I saw horror. Absolute horror.
Beside me, Rassi reached out and touched the mind-impulse unit built
into the floor of the bridge.
‘Now, I think...’ he said. ‘Alizebeth!’ I yelled.
IN THE RANK confines of the chapel, Bequin leapt forward and grabbed
the runestaff from the hands of two inquisitors who were quivering with
power, stress and terror, our eyes rolled up blankly so that only the whites
showed. She gripped the runestaff, focused her untouchable force and—
FIVE
My plan fails.
Damn Verveuk all to hell.
The unthinkable.
SHE WAS KILLED.
Not at once, of course. The backrip of the Titan’s terrible sentience tore
into her, overwhelmed her untouchable quality by dint of its sheer force,
and broke her mind.
Electrical discharge crackled down the haft of my runestaff, throwing
Rassi and myself away and blasting Alizebeth back across the chapel. The
scorch marks are still visible on the incorruptible steel: the perfectly etched
fingerprints of Poul Rassi, Gregor Eisenhorn and Alizebeth Bequin.
Nayl told me afterwards that the psychic recoil had tossed Rassi and
myself to either side like dolls, but the main force had been directed at
Bequin. She had flown through the air a dozen metres, her cloak fluttering
out and cracked off the back wall of the chapel with a sound that Nayl knew
meant snapping bones.
He ran to her, calling her name. Fischig lurched forward too. Rassi and I
lay on the ground, weeping and gasping. The runestaff, steaming, had
landed on the stone floor between us with a clang.
My plan had failed dismally and completely.
BLOOD TRICKLING FROM my nose, I got up, Swole and Haar helping me. I
had little idea where I was. Images of the Age of Strife still permeated my
mind. ‘Rassi?’ I gasped.
‘Alive!’ said Begundi, crouching next to the sprawled inquisitor. ‘But
he’s weak...’
‘Alizebeth?’ I asked softly, looking to where she lay. Fischig and Nayl
were huddled over her. Nayl looked back at me, and shook his head.
‘No...’ I said, pushing Kara Swole away as I stepped forward. Not
Alizebeth. Not her, after all this time.
‘She’s hurt bad, boss,’ Nayl said. ‘I’ll try to make her comfortable, but...’
The tread of Cruor Vult echoed outside.
I staggered towards Bequin. She looked so still. So broken.
‘Oh sweet Emperor, please, no—’
‘Inquisitor...’ said Haar. ‘We’re dead now, aren’t we, for sure?’
I realised slowly that the Titan was right outside.
‘What are you doing?’ Begundi yelled at me.
I had no idea. I was only partially conscious. I had Barbarisater in my fist
and was running for the door. I think I meant to go out and face the Titan
with my sword. That’s how far gone I was.
One man with a sword, intent on facing down a Battle Titan.
Before I could reach the door, I heard the scream of down-jets and the
chatter of cannon-fire.
I didn’t have to look out to know it was my gun-cutter. Damn Medea.
‘Thorn to Aegis, the spite of justice! Belay! Belay!’
‘Thorn requires Aegis, the shades of Eternity, Razor Delphus Pathway!
Pattern Ivory!’
‘Thorn denies! The cover of stillness! Belay!’
‘Aegis responds to Verveuk. The matter, quite done.’
‘No!’ I bellowed. ‘Nooo!’ Medea’s response had told me that she was
following Bastian Verveuk’s orders now. He had commanded her to take the
gun-cutter up. He had ordered her to attack the Titan.
I honestly believe that he thought he was helping me. That he could do
some good.
Damn Verveuk. Damn Verveuk all to hell.
I RAN OUTSIDE in time to see the majestic raptor-shape of my gun-cutter
burning in low across the PDF station, blazing its guns at the slowly turning
Titan. The streams of hi-cal shells were just pinging off the giant’s thick,
armoured skin.
Cruor Vult turned with a scrape of metal against metal, raised its right fist
and fired. The conical flame-flash of its muzzle gases, white-hot to the
point of incandescence, twitched and flickered around the gatling blaster.
The cutter bucked and lurched as the first rounds struck it. It tried to
evade, but the air was air was too thick with pelting bolts.
The ferocious salvo ripped the belly out of my beloved gun-cutter and
tore off a tail-wing. Spewing flames and smoke, the cutter veered off, debris
cascading away from its shredded hull. It tried to climb.
Its main engines stalled out.
Leaving a wide streak of smoke behind it in the air, the cutter banked
violently to the left, ripped a wing strut through the edge of the ancient,
rusted dish, and dropped. It hit the shore of the lake, burying itself in the
beach mud and shingle, leaving a smouldering groove thirty metres long
behind it.
I stumbled forward, trying to see, but the main bulk of the downed cutter
was obscured by buildings. It was ablaze, I could tell that much. Cruor Vult
began to pace slowly towards the beach.
I had a sudden mental image of a hunter walking to his wounded quarry,
preparing to fire a final, point-blank kill-shot.
Around the corner of the next longhouse, I could see down the glinting
shingle of the icy lakeshore. The Titan was crunching away from me, its
vast treads leaving perfect indentations of pulverised pebbles behind it. The
cutter was half on its side, a mangled, truncated wreck, driven down into
the scree and hard, cold mud of the shoreline. Wretched black fumes were
boiling out of its innards, and curls of steam were rising where the lake
water was in contact with flaming debris.
There was a little, tinny bang, and an exit hatch blew out of the cutter’s
flank, fired off by explosive bolts. A figure, clearly injured, fell out of the
hatch, and began to struggle up the beach.
It looked like Verveuk.
The Titan was only about fifty metres from the crashed vessel now, its
feet lifting sprays of water as it strode through the beachline shallows.
I became aware of movement beside me. It was Haar, his long-las raised
and aimed at the Titan, a defiant gesture so full of courage it quite eclipsed
its own basic stupidity. Kara Swole was close behind him, anxiously
accompanying Rassi, who had dragged himself out to join me. He looked
half-dead from his trials in the mind-link, his eyes sunken and dark, his lips
tight and bloodless.
I wonder how the hell I looked.
Begundi followed after them. He’d holstered his pistols again. He knew
firepower like that was pointless. Fischig and Nayl had stayed by
Alizebeth’s side in the chapel.
Rassi had my runestaff, and was using it to stay upright.
‘Get back,’ I said to them all. ‘Just get back... there’s nothing we can do.’
‘We fight...’ gasped Rassi. ‘We fight... the arch-enemy... in the name of
the God-Emperor of Mankind... until we drop...’
He raised my runestaff and used it to amplify his weary mind. Psycho-
thermic energy, manifesting far more powerfully than it had done through
his cane, spat at the towering back of the great Titan. I don’t know if he
hoped to hurt it. I don’t know if he was so far gone by that stage to believe
he could. I think he was simply trying to distract it from the cutter.
Rassi’s scorching arc of flame seemed so devastating as it swirled out of
the runestaff beside me, so bright it hurt my eyes, so hot it singed my hair.
But by the time it struck the Titan, its true scale was woefully revealed. It
flared uselessly off the Titan’s rear torso cowling.
But still he kept it going. The psychothermic fire turned green and then
blue white. Haar started to fire his weapon. I think Kara did too.
Like kisses into the whirlwind, my old master Hapshant would have said.
Cruor Vult raked the cutter’s wreck with blaster rounds. The first few
instants of the merciless blitz ruptured the hull, twisting it, deforming it,
dashing shards of metal up across the shore and out over the lake, peppering
it with splash ripples.
The cutter seemed to writhe, as if it was trying to escape the
bombardment. In truth, it was simply being shifted and jolted as the
hurricane of shots hammered it from end to end and shredded it.
Then it exploded. A big, bright flash, a cudgelling boom and a rush of
shockwave. The blast ripped a hole in the beach and sent a significant tidal
wave back across the lake towards the far side.
Where the cutter had been – where Medea, Aemos and Dahault had been
– was just a pit of leaping flame. Debris, water and pebbles rained down
painfully like an apocalyptic cloudburst. The Titan virtually disappeared in
a sudden outrash of steam.
Verveuk had been fifty metres from the wreck, stumbling inland, the last
I had seen him. When I dared raise my head from the rain of shingle, there
was no sign of him.
Its murder done, the Battle Titan turned on us.
I was knocked flat, and I struck my head so hard on a prefab wall I
blacked out for a second. I discovered later that Begundi had taken me
down into what little cover was available with a desperate flying tackle.
Cruor Vult had improved its aim.
The cold island air was full of mineral dust from the pebbles and rock
that had been atomised by its blaster fire. Rassi and Haar simply didn’t exist
any more. They had been vaporised by the mega-grade military weapon.
My runestaff, blackened but intact, lay on a wide patch of ground that had
been transmuted to furrowed glass by the hideous alchemy of blaster fire.
The only other trace of them was a small, broken section of Haar’s lasrifle.
Kara Swole lay twenty metres away where the blast had thrown her. She
was covered in blood, and I was sure she was dead.
And I was sure we were dead too. Thuring had won. He had killed my
friends and allies in front of my eyes and now he had won.
I had nothing to left to fight him with. I had nothing that could take on
the power of a Titan. I’d had nothing when this one-sided duel began, and I
sure as hell had nothing left now.
I...
An idea came upon me, insidious and foul, wrenched into the light by the
extremity of my position. I shook it off. It was unthinkable. The notion was
revolting, inexcusable.
But it was also true. I did have something.
I had something more powerful than a Titan.
If I dared use it. If I had the audacity to unleash it.
Unthinkable. Unthinkable.
Cruor Vult thundered towards me through the ebbing steam.
I could hear the whine of the autoloaders in its massive gatling assembly
connecting up fresh munition hoppers. I could see the beach pebbles at my
feet, thousands of them, skipping slightly with every step it took.
‘Bex...’
‘Sir?’
‘Get Kara and run. Go for the chapel.’
‘Sir, I—’
Do it now, I willed and he sprang up, running fast.
I crawled over to the runestaff and grabbed its haft. It was hot to the
touch, and sticky with blood.
Duclane Haar and Poul Rassi would have to serve as the sacrifice, I
realised pragmatically, already disgusted with myself. There was no time,
no opportunity to do anything more elaborate. As it was, I had scarcely any
of the tools, devices, unguents, charms or wards that I would normally have
believed necessary to undertake an action like this.
I caught myself. Until that very moment, I had never even considered
undertaking an action like this, no matter the preparations.
Kneeling on the vitrified ground in the path of an oncoming Chaos Battle
Titan, holding upright in both hands a runestaff slick with the blood residue
of two beloved friends, I began the incantations.
It was hard. Hard to remember word-perfect the pertinent verses of the
Malus Codicium, a work I had studied on and off for years in secret. These
were writings I had been eager to learn and understand, but which filled me
with dread all the same. After my first sabbatical to study the Codicium, just
a few months after the execution of its previous owner Quixos, I had been
forced into retreat to recover, and required counselling from the abbots of
the Sacred Heart monastery on Alsor.
Now I was trying to remember the same passages. Driving myself.
Struggling to repeat writings I had once struggled to erase from my mind.
If I got even a word wrong, a phrasing, a point of vocabulary, we would
all be dead at the hands of an evil far worse than Cruor Vult.
SIX
Chaos against Chaos.
The price.
The consequence.
A MOMENT. A freezing classroom many years before. Titus Endor and
myself, shivering in our seats at ebonwood desks eroded by the scratchings
and carvings of a thousand previous pupils. We were merely eighteen days
into our initial training as junior interrogators. Inquisitor Hapshant had
stormed in, slammed the door, cast his stack of grimoires down on the main
lectern – which made us both jump – and declared: ‘A servant of the
Inquisition who makes Chaos his tool against Chaos is a greater enemy of
mankind than Chaos itself! Chaos knows the bounds of its own evil and
accepts it. A servant of the Inquisition who uses Chaos is fooling himself,
denies the truth, and damns us all by his delusion!’
ON THE LAKESHORE at Miquol, I was not fooling myself. I knew how
desperate this gamble was.
COMMODUS VOKE, DEAD fifty years by then, had once said to me... and I
paraphrase for I did not record it word for word at the time – ‘“Know your
enemy” is the greatest lie we own. Never submit to it. The radical path has
its attractions, and I admit I have been tempted over the years of my life.
But it is littered with lies. Once you look to the warp for answers, for
knowledge to use against the arch-enemy, you are using Chaos. That makes
you a practitioner. And you know what happens to practitioners, don’t you,
Eisenhorn? The Inquisition comes for them.’
ON THAT DESOLATE beach, I felt sure I could sort truth from lies. Voke had
simply misunderstood the fineness of the line.
MIDAS BETANCORE HAD once, during a late night of drinking and Glavian
rules regicide, said, ‘Why do they do it? The radicals, I mean. Don’t they
understand that even getting close to the warp is suicide?’
WITH THE RUNESTAFF in my hands, on that frozen island on Durer, I knew
it wasn’t suicide. It was the opposite.
GODWIN FISCHIG, IN a grave-field shrine on Cadia, had once warned me to
stay away from any hint of radical sympathy. ‘Trust me, Eisenhorn, if I ever
thought you were, I’d shoot you myself.’
IT WASN’T THAT simple. Emperor damn me, it just wasn’t that simple! I
thought of Quixos, such a brilliant man, such a stalwart servant of the
Imperium, so totally polluted by treasonous evil because he had tried to
understand the very filth he fought against. I had declared him heretic and
executed him with my own hand. I understood the dangers.
CRUOR VULT THUNDERED towards me. I uttered the last of the potent
syllables and dipped my mind into the warp. Not the simmering warp-scape
of the Titan’s mind-link, but the true warp. Channelled by the runestaff and
warded by the prayers I had ritually intoned, I flowed into a vaster, darker
void. I reached across the fabric of space towards Gudrun, far away, an
entire sub-sector away, towards a private estate on the Insume Headland.
I reached into it, into a secret oubliette that had been vacuum sealed,
warp-damped, void-shielded and locked with thirteen locks. Only I knew
the codes to break down those barriers, for I had set them myself.
It was crumpled in the middle of the floor, wrapped in chains.
I woke it up. I set it free.
I JERKED OUT of my trance. The runestaff bucked in my hands as the
unleashed daemon energy flared through it.
I fought to retain my grip and to enunciate precisely the words of
command and the specific instructions.
Like a small sun dawning, the enslaved daemon poured out of the head of
the runestaff. Its radiance lit up the dismal shore and cast a long shadow out
behind the Titan.
‘Cherubael?’ I whispered.
‘Yessss...?’
‘Kill it.’
LIGHTNING CRACKLED. A freak storm suddenly erupted over the lake,
swirling the heavens and driving rain down in sheets, accompanied by
fierce winds and catastrophic electrical displays.
A ghastly white thing, moving so rapidly it could only be registered as an
afterimage on the retina, surged out of my staff and went straight into the
black bulk of Cruor Vult.
The Titan hesitated, mid-step, one foot raised. It shuddered. Its great
arms flailed for a moment. Then its chrome skull-face cracked, crazed and
shattered, blowing out in a burst of sickly green light.
Cruor Vult swayed, the rainstorm drenching off its creaking bulk.
A halo of light lit up the lake shore and the old PDF base. Cruor Vult,
ancient enemy of mankind, exploded from the waist up in a globe of furious
white heat. Nothing of its head, torso or arms survived the immolation.
The legs, one foot still raised, tottered and swayed and then collapsed,
falling sideways like an avalanche and destroying the ruined remains of the
station’s dish.
Cruor Vult was dead. Fayde Thuring was dead.
And I was unconscious, hurled back by the death-blast.
And that meant Cherubael was free.
IF IT HAD fled then, it would have escaped. Indeed, it might have fled
deep enough into the miasmic warp to evade me forever, even if I exhausted
what was left of my life trying to summon it back. It was wary of me now,
and knew my tricks.
Certainly, it might have escaped far enough to avoid my clutches for
many years to come, and in that time have cost the Imperium dearly.
But it did not. The daemon was too consumed by rancour for that.
It came back to kill me.
I WOKE WITH a start, and realised instantly that Cherubael was free thanks
to my loss of control. I looked around, but it seemed like I was alone on the
beach. The sky was still swollen with storm clouds, and lightning formed
crackling golden crowns around the peaks of the mountains.
The rain was easing, pattering across the glossy, wet pebbles and the
steaming ruin of Cruor Vult. My skin prickled. I knew it was still here.
I had done the unthinkable, and now I had to undo it. Cherubael had to be
bound again. It could not be allowed to remain free.
I picked up the runestaff. The rain was washing the filmy blood off its
hard, polished form. I held it firmly in my left hand and drew Barbarisater.
The blade twitched, tasting the daemon in the air.
‘Gracious Emperor of Mankind, hallowed be your majesty, bright be
your light everlasting, vouchsafe your servant in this hour of peril—’
‘That won’t save you,’ said a voice. I switched around, but there was no
sign of a speaker.
‘Bright be your light everlasting, vouchsafe your servant in this hour of
peril, so that I may continue to serve you, great lord, and purify your
dominion of—’
‘It won’t, Gregor. The Benediction of Terra? It’s just words, Gregor. Just
words.’
‘...continue to serve you, great lord, and purify your dominion of man,
casting out all daemons and changelings of warpcraft—’
‘But I have more than words for you, Gregor. I liked you, Gregor, of all
men, you had a spirit I admired. I worked for you, I spared you more than
once... consider that. All I asked in return was that you honour our compact
and release me. And what did you do? You tricked me. You trapped me.
You used me.’
The words seemed to echo all around me, but no matter how fast I
turned, I could not see it. Its voice was in my head. I struggled to continue
the repetitions, struggled to keep hold of the sense of the benediction, but it
was hard. I wanted to answer its taunts. I wanted to rage at it that it had
tricked me first. There had been no compact between us! It had used me to
fashion its own escape from the enslaving charms Quixos had wrought
around it.
I dared not. I focused on the repeats. Barbarisater shivered from hilt to
tip, resonating with the psychic power that washed around me.
‘...vouchsafe your servant in this hour of peril, so that I may continue to
serve you, great lord—’
A star came out, over the lake. A hazy ring of white around a brilliant,
gleaming centre. Almost fluttering, like a leaf on the wind, it eddied down
towards me and settled a few metres away.
The pebbles beneath it turned to glass. The light was almost too bright to
look at. Cherubael hovered in the centre of the glare. He was at his most
deadly now, non-corporeal, a daemon spirit, raw and bare, unfettered by a
fleshly host. I could not resolve any real details in the light. In truth, I had
no wish to gaze upon the daemon’s true form. It was not even man-shaped
any more. I had always presumed white light to be pure and somehow
chaste, to be noble and good. But this whiteness was unutterably evil,
chilling, its purity an abomination.
‘...hallowed be your majesty, bright be your light everlasting...’
‘Shut up, Gregor. Shut up so I can hear myself kill you.’
My weapons, staff and sword, were useless physically. Cherubael had no
host body to destroy. But they were strong psychically. I had banished
Cherubael with the runestaff once before, and as far as I know obliterated
his daemon kins Prophaniti. But my mind had been stronger in those
battles, and psychic weapons are only as powerful as the will that directs
them. Cherubael knew how tired and ill-focused I was. I could feel it trying
to weaken me by teasing out the agonies I felt inside... Bequin, Medea,
Aemos, Rassi, Haar... It wanted me to think about the deaths of those dear
friends so that I would be weakened still further by grief.
But it was weak too. It had just expended huge reserves of power
vanquishing a Titan.
The light surged forward, to test me, I think. I swung Barbarisater to
deflect it and felt the electrical impact down my arm. It surged again and I
swept the staff around, driving it back.
It circled me. I’d stung it. It knew it was in for a fight.
If that’s what it wanted...
I lunged at it, Barbarisater keening. Cherubael blocked with a bar of
luminous energy and convulsed out a pulse of pale radiance that blew me
off my feet into the air.
I landed hard on the shingle, but sprang up fast, remembering every close
combat move I’d been taught over the years by the likes of Harlon Nayl,
Kara Swole, Arianrhod Esw Sweydyr, Midas, Medea...
It was coming right onto me, blinding bright. It was like fighting a star. I
smashed at it with the head of my staff and then somersaulted out of its
path, landing on my feet and sprinting away.
I ran under the smouldering arches of Cruor Vult’s fallen legs and then
back up the tough slog of the beach towards the station. I could distinctly
hear the air rush as it burned after me.
I feinted left, but it had guessed as much. The daemon-star was right on
me. I swung my sword, leapt to the right, and vaulted over its next blade of
light using the staff as a pole.
Cherubael laughed. Its cackling voice followed me as I sprinted up
between two longhouses. The daemon-star chased after me, its psychic
force scattering the beach stones behind it in a wake.
I heard a groaning, crashing sound and realised the walls were closing in.
Cherubael was lifting both longhouses off their blocks and crushing them
together with me in between.
I tore through the wall of the left hand prefab with Barbarisater and leapt
through as the juddering huts slammed into each other. Cherubael burned
through the fibre-ply wall to get at me, and was greeted by my counter-
attack of stabbing blade and staff.
I could drive it back, but I couldn’t do any more than that. My mental
reserves were just not strong enough.
My only chance was to bind him again. But how?
Dronicus came out of nowhere. I believe, or at least it is a notion I cling
on to for the sake of my sanity, that the Emperor of Mankind provides help
for his true servants in their hour of need, even in the strangest forms.
Dronicus, old, insane Dronicus, had clearly been observing the day’s
dreadful events from hiding, and now he emerged because he had made a
gravely mistaken apprehension. He had seen the white light of the daemon
destroy the Titan. To him, therefore, the white light was a friend because it
had vanquished a foe.
To him, the potent white light was the Emperor returned to save him.
He ran out of the shadows, calling the Emperor’s name, praising him,
piteously expressing his gratitude. He was an ancient, emaciated man
dressed in dirt and rags. He should have offered no threat to the daemon
whatsoever.
Except that, in the Emperor’s honour, he had retrieved the fallen aquila
altarpiece from the chapel and was holding it up in front of him.
Cherubael howled and backed away, tumbling like thistledown along the
dirt track between the longhouses. Perplexed, Dronicus ran after it, offering
words of worship to the Emperor that must have driven holy spikes into
Cherubael’s rotten soul.
I had a moment’s respite from the assault.
I looked around. I knew I had to think fast.
BASTIAN VERVEUK WAS still alive. He was a bloody, broken mess, his
clothes and hair virtually burned off him from the cutter’s death-blast.
Though I loathed him for what he had done, I felt pity as I saw him. His
eyes were still yearning. They seemed to light up with joy as they saw me
approach. He reached out a bloody hand.
He thought I was coming to rescue him.
I confess here, now, that I hate myself for what I did. That I despised
Verveuk does not excuse it. He was an odious wretch who had cost me
more dearly than I could say, but he was still a servant of the Inquisition.
And, damn him, he worshipped and trusted me.
But there was no alternative. I made the right decision. I had released
Cherubael because Cruor Vult simply had to be stopped for the good of
Mankind. Now Cherubael had to be stopped, and I was forced to make a
similarly hard choice. I will pay. In time. In the hereafter, when I come
before the Golden Throne.
I knelt beside him. His yearning face looked up at me. Damn that
yearning, puppy look!
‘M-master...’
‘Bastian, are you a true servant of the Emperor?’
‘I... I am...’
‘And you will so serve him in any way you can?’
‘I will, master.’
‘And are you pure?’ Foolish question! Verveuk’s damned purity had led
to all his mistakes. His puritanical piety had made him a liability in the first
place.
But he was pure. As pure as any man could be.
I placed my hand on his chest and made my fingers wet with his blood.
Then I daubed certain runes and markings on his forehead and face, on his
neck and his heart, muttering seldom heard imprecations from the Malus
Codicium.
‘W-what are you doing?’ he wavered. Damned questions, even now!
‘What must be done. You are doing the Emperor’s work, Bastian.’
A scream howled out of the station and Dronicus appeared, running
terrified towards the lake. His hands were on fire, dripping with white-hot,
molten metal.
Cherubael had finally found the strength to melt the aquila.
Still screaming, the poor old man plunged into the icy lake, the water
steaming and spitting around his agonised hands.
Cherubael’s deadly star came shimmering down the beach towards me.
‘Forgive me, Verveuk,’ I said.
‘O-of course, master,’ he mumbled.
‘F-for what?’ he added, suddenly.
Bellowing the incantations of binding, the litany of servitus, the wards of
entrapment, I met Cherubael head on, the runestaff glittering with power.
‘In servitutem abduco, I bind thee fast forever into this host!’
‘WHAT IN THE name of hell happened here?’ Fischig bellowed, his gun
raised as he ran down towards me.
‘Everything. Nothing. It’s over, Fischig.’
‘But... what is that?’ he asked.
The daemonhost floated a few centimetres off the ground next to me. I
had fashioned a leash from my belt, tied off around Verveuk’s scorched,
distended throat.
‘I have trapped a daemon, Godwin. He is bound and cannot harm us
now.’
‘But... Verveuk?’
‘Dead. We must honour him. He has given his all to the Emperor.’
Fischig looked at me warily. ‘How did you know the means to bind a
daemon, Eisenhorn?’ he asked.
‘I have learned much. It is an inquisitor’s job to know these things.’
Fischig took a step back. ‘Verveuk...’ he began. ‘He was dead before you
used his body, wasn’t he?’
I didn’t answer. Three shuttles were powering in across the lake,
preparing for landing. The reinforcements summoned by Alizebeth had
finally arrived.
SEVEN
Taking leave of Miquol.
Gudrun, sanctuary.
Her heart’s desire.
I WANTED NOTHING more than to be gone from the place. It had exhausted
me and cost me.
My followers, well-drilled specialists all, deployed from the shuttles and
took control of the area, rounding up the last of Thuring’s dismayed
accomplices. I was told that Menderef and Koth were on their way too,
bringing with them units of militia and Inquisitorial guard.
I wasn’t going to wait around for them.
There were things I wanted as few people as possible to see.
I issued instructions that would bite great holes out of my personal
coffers. But I didn’t care.
I sent Bequin away on a shuttle as fast as possible, with Nayl and
Begundi guarding her.
Nayl was told to get her condition stabilised at the nearest general
infirmary and then arrange passage for her off-world, to the Distaff’s
headquarters on Messina. They took Kara Swole with them too. Kara was
alive, but seriously wounded.
I gave Fischig strict instructions to remain behind as my proxy. His heart
didn’t seem in it. I knew the daemonhost was troubling him more than he
dared to say.
His brief was simple. Secure the island until the main Inquisitorial Party
arrived. See to it that a full statement was made and that the cache of
dormant Chaos Titans was destroyed. Then formally close the Examination
until further notice.
It didn’t seem unreasonable. A senior inquisitor had just risked all and
lost much stopping a Battle Titan. His withdrawal from the Durer
Examination for recovery seemed utterly justified.
I would contact him later, and take it from there.
I was about to leave on another of the shuttles, with the silent, shrouded
daemonhost, when the first piece of good news that day came to my
attention.
Medea and Aemos had survived.
They were cut and battered, but she had dragged Aemos from the cutter
crash and got him to cover before Verveuk had ejected. They had lain in
cover, dazed and breathless.
They had seen everything.
I embraced them both. ‘You’re both coming with me,’ I said.
‘Gregor... what did you do?’ Medea asked.
‘Just get on the shuttle.’
‘What did she mean?’ Fischig asked.
I didn’t answer him directly. I was too tired. Too afraid that my stumbling
explanation would not satisfy him. ‘See that things here are done properly. I
will contact you in a month with instructions.’
I gave him my rosette badge of office so that his authority would be
unquestioned.
It was gesture of the frankest trust, but it seemed to disturb him. Then I
held out my hand, and he grasped it with a half-hearted grip.
‘I’ll do my job,’ he said. ‘Have I ever let you down?’
He hadn’t, and I supposed that was his point. Fischig had never let me
down, but perhaps now the reverse was not so true.
TWO DAYS LATER, we were ensconced in a suite of cabins aboard the far
trader Pulchritude, en route to Gudrun in the Helican sub. A three-week
passage, Emperor willing.
I SLEPT FOR long periods during the voyage, the deep and thankfully
dreamless sleep of the soul-weary, but my fatigue lingered. The work on
Miquol had been draining, mentally and emotionally. Each time I woke,
feeling rested, there was a moment of precious calm before I remembered
what I had done. Then the anxieties returned.
Every day of the voyage, I made two visits. The first was to the ship’s
chapel, where I said my observances more dutifully and strictly than I had
done in a hundred years. I felt unclean, violated, though the violation was
self-inflicted, I know. I longed for a confessor. In better days, I would have
turned to Alizebeth, but that was not possible now.
Instead, I prayed for her survival. I prayed for Swole’s health to be
restored. I made offerings and lit candles for the souls of Poul Rassi,
Duclane Haar and poor Dahault, who had perished in the cutter crash.
I prayed for Bastian Verveuk’s soul and craved absolution.
I prayed for Fischig’s understanding.
In my service to the God-Emperor, I have always considered myself a
dutiful and faithful soul, but it is strange how the everyday customs of
worship become so easily neglected. During that voyage, having stumbled
closer to the path of heresy than at any time in my life, I felt, ironically, as if
my faith was renewed. Perhaps it takes a glimpse over the lip of the abyss
to truly appreciate the pure heavens above. I felt chastened and virtuous, as
if I had survived an ordeal and emerged a better man.
During the moments of self-doubt and anxiety, and they were numerous,
I wondered if that sense of spiritual improvement was simply subconscious
denial. Had the events of Miquol really been an overdue wake-up call to
steer me smartly back onto the puritan path, or was I deluding myself?
Deluding myself like Quixos and all the others who had fallen into the
abyss without even realising it.
THE SECOND DAILY visit was to the armoured hold where the daemonhost
was secured.
The Pulchritude’s captain, a stern Ingeranian called Gelb Startis, had
almost refused point blank to accept the daemonhost aboard his ship. Of
course, he didn’t know it was a daemonhost. Very few individuals in the
Imperium would know how to recognise one, and besides I had draped the
silent figure in hooded robes. But there was a tangible air of evil and decay
around the shrouded monster.
I’d been in no mood to bargain with Startis. I’d simply established my
credentials with my signet ring, given him my personal guarantee that the
‘guest’ would be properly monitored, and paid him three times the going
rate for our passage.
That had made the whole venture more appealing for him.
I’D CHAINED THE daemonhost in the hold, and spent ten hours inscribing
the area with the correct sigils of containment. Cherubael was still zombie-
like and dumb, as if entranced. The severe trauma of its binding was still
lingering, and for the while it was docile.
On each visit, I triple-checked the sigils and, where necessary, refreshed
them. I used a quill and ink dye to permanently mark in the runes I had
painted on its flesh in blood.
That was chilling work. Verveuk’s body had healed and was now glossy
and healthy. His eyes were closed, but his face was still that of the young
inquisitor, though the boy’s forehead was beginning to bulge with the
vestigial nub-horns that were sprouting from the bone.
On the ninth day, it opened Verveuk’s eyes. The blank wrath of
Cherubael shone out. It had finally come through the terrible rigours of
binding, rigours made worse by the crude and rudimentary way I had
performed the rite.
‘He wants you dead,’ were the first words it spoke.
‘Am I speaking to Bastian or Cherubael?’
‘Both,’ it said.
I nodded. ‘Nice try, Cherubael. I know Verveuk is gone from that body.’
‘He hates you though. I tasted his soul as he passed out of this body and I
passed in. He knows what you did and he’s taken that dread knowledge to
the afterlife with him.’
‘The Emperor protects.’
‘The Emperor craps himself at the sound of my name,’ it responded.
I slapped its face hard. ‘You are bound, lord daemon prince, and you will
be respectful.’
Floating off the dirty hold floor, wrenching at its securing chains,
Cherubael began to scream obscenities at me. I left.
ON EACH RETURN visit, it tried a different tack.
On the tenth day, it was pleading, remorseful.
On the eleventh, sullen and promising grievous harm to me.
On the thirteenth, silent and uncooperative.
On the sixteenth, sly.
‘The truth of it, Gregor,’ it said, ‘is that I’ve missed you. Our times
together have always been exhilarating. Quixos was a cruel master, but you
understand me. On that island, you called on me for help. Oh, we’ve had
our differences. And you’re a tricky so-and-so. But I like that. I think my
existence could be an awful lot worse than being in your thrall. So, tell me...
what do you have planned? What glorious work will you and I do together?
You’ll find me willing, ready. In time, you’ll be able to trust me. Like a
friend. I’ve always wanted one of those. You and me, Gregor, friends,
working together. How would that be?’
‘That would be impossible.’
‘Oh, Gregor...’ it chided.
‘Silence!’ I said. I couldn’t stomach its silky bonhomie. ‘I am an Imperial
inquisitor serving the light of the Golden Throne of Terra, and you are a
thing of filth and darkness, serving only yourself. You are everything I
stand against.’
It licked its lips. Verveuk’s canines were becoming ice-white fangs. ‘So
why did you ever decide to bind me, Eisenhorn?’
‘I regularly ask myself the same question,’ I said.
‘Release me, then,’ it whispered. ‘Cut me free from these pentagrammic
bindings and let me go. We’ll call it even. I’ll go, and we’ll never bother
each other again. I promise. Let me go and that will be the matter done.’
‘Just how stupid do you think I am?’ I asked.
He floated up a little higher, cocked his head on one side, and smiled. ‘It
was worth a try.’
I was at the door when he called my name again.
‘I’m content, you know. Being bound to you.’
‘Really?’ I replied with disinterest.
It nodded gleefully. ‘It gives me ample opportunity to corrupt you
entirely.’
ON THE NINETEENTH day, it nearly got me. When I entered the hold, it was
sobbing on the floor. I tried to ignore it, checking the sigils, but it looked
up.
‘Master!’ it said.
‘Verveuk?’
‘Yes! Please, master! It’s gone away for a moment, and I have control
again. Please, cut me free! Banish it!’
‘Bastian, I—’
‘I forgive you, master! I know you only did what you had to do and I’m
more grateful than you could know that you chose me as worthy for this
desperate work! But please, please! While I have control! Banish it and
release me from this torture!’
I approached it, gripping my runestaff. ‘I can’t, Bastian.’
‘You can, master! Now, while there’s a moment clear! Oh, the agony! To
be locked in here with that monster! To share the same flesh! It is gnawing
away at my soul, and showing me things to drive me insane! Give mercy,
master!’
I reached out and pointed to a complex rune inscribed on his chest. ‘You
see this?’
‘Yes?’
‘That is the rune of voiding. It is an essential part of the binding
transaction. It empties the host of any previous soul so that the daemon can
be contained. In effect, it kills the original host. You are not Bastian
Verveuk because Bastian is dead and departed from this flesh. I killed him.
You mimick his voice well, as I would expect, because you have his larynx
and palate, but you are Cherubael.’
It sighed, nodded and floated up again to the limit its chains would
permit.
‘You can’t blame me for trying.’
I slapped its face again hard. ‘No, but I can punish you.’
It didn’t react.
‘Understand this, daemon. Binding you, using you, that has cost me
dearly. I hate myself for doing it. But there was no choice. Now I have you
enslaved again, I am going to take no chances. The correct containment of
you will now become my life’s primary devotion. The history texts will not
remember me as a man so driven to accomplish things he got lazy and
slack. There is no escape from me now. I will not allow it. You are mine and
you will stay mine.’
‘I see.’
‘Do you understand?’
‘I understand you are a man of the highest piety and resolve.’
‘Good.’
‘Just one thing: how does it feel to be a murderer?’
EARLIER, I REMARKED that very few citizens of the Imperium of Man
would recognise a daemonhost or understand what one was. That is true. It
is also true that the select group who would know included several of my
followers. Those that had been with me on 56-Izar, Eechen, Cadia, Farness
Beta.
Aemos and Medea certainly understood the concept of daemonhosting. I
had briefed them myself. I felt that Medea, like Fischig, only vaguely
understood what I had brought onto the Pulchritude with me, though they
regarded it with shuddering suspicion.
Aemos knew, though. He knew damn well. As far as I could tell, he knew
everything that it was possible to know without going mad. But he had been
with me longer than any of them. We had been friends and companions for
more years than I dared count. I knew I had his trust and that I’d have to err
wildly before he questioned my methods.
I realised after a day or two of the voyage that he wasn’t even going to
mention it.
I couldn’t have that. I wanted openness. So I brought the matter up
myself.
It was late one night, perhaps the fifth night of the voyage. We were
playing double regicide (two boards in parallel, one played backwards using
militants as crowning pieces, the other played long with sentries wild and a
freedom to regent-up on white-square takes after the third sequence of
play... this was the only formation of the ancient strategy game that even
began to test his mind) and sipping the best amasec Startis could provide.
‘Our passenger,’ I began, picking up a squire piece and then putting it
down again as I contemplated my next move, ‘what are your thoughts?
You’ve been very quiet.’
‘I didn’t believe it was my place to remark,’ he said.
I moved the squire to militant three and immediately regretted it. ‘Uber,
how long have we been friends?’
I could tell he was actually about to calculate. ‘I believe we first met in
the seventh month of—’
‘I mean roughly.’
‘Well, to say friends, perhaps several years after our first meeting, which
would make it—’
‘Could we agree that a rough estimate would be... a very long time?’
He thought about it. ‘We could,’ he said, sounding unconvinced.
‘And we are friends, aren’t we?’
‘Oh, of course! Well, I hope so,’ he said, promptly taking my dexter
basilisk and securing a ruthless toe-hold into my second line. ‘Aren’t we?’
‘Yes. Yes, we are. I look to you for answers.’
‘You do.’
‘Sometimes, I think those answers could come without me having to ask
the questions first.’
‘Hmmm,’ he said. He was about to move his yale. He raised the bone-
carved piece and studied it closely. ‘I have always wondered about the
yale,’ he said. ‘A heraldic beast, obviously, tracing its origins back into the
ages before the Great Strife. But what does it represent? The analogies of
the other pieces, given historic traditions and the structure of Imperial
culture, are obvious. But the yale... of all pieces in regicide, that one puzzles
me...’
‘You’re doing it again.’
‘Doing what?’
‘Procrastinating. Avoiding the issue.’
‘Am I?’
‘You are.’
‘I’m sorry.’ He put the piece down again, taking one of my raptors in a
move I simply hadn’t seen coming. Now he had my militant in a vice.
‘Well?’
‘Well?’
‘What do you think?’
He frowned. ‘The yale. Most perturbatory.’
I rallied and took his yale abruptly. It was a foolish move, but it got his
attention.
‘About the other matter. The passenger.’
‘It’s a daemonhost.’
‘Yes, it is,’ I said, almost relieved.
‘You bound it into Verveuk’s body on Miquol.’
‘I did. I think you watched me do it.’
‘I was concussed, drowsy. But, yes. I saw it.’
‘What do you think about that?’
He made a guard piece a regent and crossed into my sinister field. The
game would be over in another half dozen moves.
‘I try not to, for what it’s worth. I try not to imagine how a man I have
followed and believed in for so long suddenly has the means and power to
unleash a daemon, channel it and bind it again. I try not to think about the
possibility that Bastian Verveuk was alive when the binding occurred. I try
to believe that my beloved inquisitor hasn’t crossed a line from where there
is no crossing back.’
‘Checkmate,’ he added.
I conceded both boards and sat back. ‘I’m sorry,’ I said.
‘For what?’
‘For putting you through this.’
‘Your questions are—’
‘No. I don’t mean that. In the course of my hunt for Quixos, I learned
several dark things. Chief of those was the means to control a daemon. It is
knowledge that I would have chosen never to use. But the Titan was too
much. It couldn’t be allowed to survive. I had nothing left in my arsenal
except dark lore.’
‘I understand, Gregor. Truly. This conversation wasn’t even necessary.
You did what you had to do. We survived... most of us anyway. Chaos was
denied. That’s the job, isn’t it? No one ever said it would be easy. Sacrifices
have to be made or the God-Emperor’s work will never be done.’
He leaned forward, his augmetic eyes glittering in the firelight.
‘Honestly, Gregor... if I thought you had become some demented radical,
would I be sitting here playing regicide with you?’
‘Thank you, Uber,’ I said.
AEMOS HAD GIVEN me a harder time than I had expected. Medea, on the
other hand, I was braced for, and her reaction surprised me too.
‘Daemon-what? I don’t care.’
‘You don’t?’
‘Not really. Thuring is all I care about, and you used everything you had
to get him.’
‘I did.’
‘Well, good for you.’
We were sitting in amongst the plush cushions of the Pulchritude’s
observation deck.
She peered at me, frowning. ‘Oh, I get it. You’re afraid that all of us will
think that you’ve become some heretical psycho crazy.’
By ‘all of us’ she meant my staff.
‘Do you?’
‘Hell, no! Get over it, boss! If I could do what you can do, I’d have done
the same! Screw Thuring any way you can!’
I sighed. ‘I didn’t do it for your father, Medea.’
‘What?’
‘I mean I did, but I didn’t. I wanted to avenge Midas, of course, but I
only unleashed the daemon because Thuring and his damned Titan
threatened more than just us.’
‘That planet, you mean?’
‘That planet... and others.’
‘Right.’
‘What’s the matter?’
She stroked her hair back off her face and reached for her drink. ‘You’re
telling me that if the planet hadn’t been in danger, you wouldn’t have done
the whole daemon thing?’
‘No. I want you to understand this. I wanted Thuring dead. I wanted him
to pay for your father’s death. But I didn’t release Cherubael in vengeance.
That would have been petty and small-minded. I could never have justified
that, not even to myself. I released the daemon because Fayde Thuring had
become more than just a personal enemy. He’d become an enemy of the
Imperium. I had to stop him then, and I was out of options. What I mean is,
it was a totally pragmatic decision in the end. Not a weak, emotional one.’
‘Whatever. Thuring suffered, didn’t he? He burned? That’s all I care
about. But you owe me, though?’
‘I do?’
‘You swore it. On your secrets. That I’d be there when—’
‘You were!’
‘No thanks to you! And not so I could play a part and make Thuring
suffer. So you owe me. And I want that secret. Now.’
‘What secret?’
‘You choose. But it’s got to be the darkest one you have. Since you
brought it up, what about this... this Cherubael?’
And that was how I came to tell her everything about the daemonhost.
Everything. I did it because of the honour of our oath. I also did it, I believe
now, because I wished to unburden myself to a confessor and Bequin
wasn’t there. I did it and didn’t even pause to think what might result from
it.
God-Emperor forgive me.
I HAVE ALWAYS loved Gudrun, the old capital world of the Helican sub-
sector. For a long time, I had made my main home on Thracian Primaris, a
world crusted by cities, riddled with crime, lamed by overpopulation. But I
had only lived there for the sake of convenience. It was the capital world
after all, and the Palace of the Inquisition was sited there. I visit it as little
as possible, for it depresses me.
But after the vile events of the Holy Novena, five decades before, I had
transferred my chief residence to the more relaxing climes of Gudrun.
Returning there, I felt somehow safe.
We bade Startis farewell and offloaded our luggage onto a privately
chartered shuttle. I had prepared a cargo pod for Cherubael, fully inscribed
and warded, the accomplishment of which took many hours. I said the
appropriate rites and chained it inside, adding a charm that would render it
docile. The pod was loaded by mute servitors into the shuttle’s hold.
We dropped planetwards.
From the ports of the passenger bay, I looked down at the green expanses
of the world. The great stretches of wild land and forest, the blue seas, the
tight order of the ancient cities. For many years it had been the sub-sector
capital, until the bloated giant Thracian Primaris had commandeered that
role. I knew from experience that evil and corruption lurked here as much
as it did on any Imperial world. But this was the epitome of Imperial life,
for all its vices and flaws, a singular example of the very culture I had
devoted my life to safeguard.
WE MADE A detour on the descent. I felt it prudent to secure Cherubael
somewhere other than my residence, though I had previously stored it in the
secret oubliette below the foundations. If there were any official
consequences to the incident on Durer, my estate could be subject to all
manner of unwelcome scrutiny.
I covertly owned a number of premises on Gudrun. They were not held in
my name, so that they could be used as safehouses or private retreats. One
was a semi-ruined watchtower in the wilds, three hundred kilometres south
of my home, a lonely, remote spot that I had found conducive to meditation
over the years.
Using the shuttle’s servitors, I placed the warded cargo pod containing
the daemonhost in the tower’s crypt, made the necessary rituals of holding,
and activated the simple but efficient alarm perimeter I had installed in the
tower when I first purchased it.
It would do for the while. Later, I would be very thankful I had made that
decision.
MY HOME WAS a dignified estate out on the Insume headland, twenty
minutes’ flight time from the venerable lagoon city of Dorsay. Called
Spaeton after the feudal family that had built it, it was an H-plan villa
constructed of grey ouslite stone with a green copper-tile roof. There were
adjoining garages and stables, an aviary, a drone-hive, a famous landscaped
garden and maze laid out mathematically by Utility Krauss, a water dock
down on the private inlet and a perfect sulleq lawn. It was surrounded to the
north and east by untenanted woods, fruit orchards and ample paddocks,
and from the terrace it had clear views over the Bay of Bisheen.
JARAT, MY HOUSEKEEPER, welcomed us back. It was late evening and the
residence was warm, clean and ready for occupation. Plump and dressed in
her trademark grey gown-robe and white-veiled black cap, Jarat was very
old by then. Alongside her were Jubal Kircher, my head of security, and
Aldemar Psullus, my rubricator and librarian. Beside them, Eleena Koi of
the Distaff and the astropath Jekud Vance. The rest of the house staff, thirty
of them, maids, ostlers, gardeners, cooks, sommeliers, eltuaniers and
launderers, were lined up in fresh-pressed white uniforms behind them,
along with the five black-armoured officers of the security detail. I greeted
each one personally. Jarat and Kircher had employed several newcomers
since I had last been there, and I made a point of talking to them and
learning their names: Litu, a perky junior chambermaid; Kronsky, a new
member of the security detail; Altwald, a new head groundsman inheriting
his job from his father, who had retired.
I wondered when Jarat would retire. Or Kircher, come to that. In the case
of Jarat, probably never, I decided.
My first act was to open the stronghold oubliette in the basement. I shut
down the shields and deactivated the locks, and then spent a long time
obliterating all traces of what the oubliette had been used for. I used a
flamer to scour the walls and burn away the runic inscriptions. The grisly
remains of Cherubael’s previous host form, now an empty husk, lay amid
the slack chains, and I cremated that too. The host form had been a vat-
grown organic vessel I had privately commissioned for use in the original
summoning. At the time, it had been a hard enough decision just to use a
synthetic body.
I thought of Verveuk and shivered. I burned everything.
Then I bathed, and stayed a long time in the hot water.
TWO WEEKS I spent, recuperating at Spaeton. I had tried to rest, or at least
recover, during the voyage home, but there is a tension in travel itself and
my concerns about the daemonhost’s rudimentary confinement had
prevented me from relaxing.
Now, I could rest at last.
I took long walks around the headland’s paths, or stood on the point
watching the waves crash into the rocks at the fringe of the inlet. I sat
reading in the gardens during the warm evenings. I helped junior staff
members collect early windfalls into wicker drowsies in the orchards.
I went nowhere near the library, the maze or my office. Alizebeth was
never far from my thoughts.
Aemos served as secretary during that period, a job that Bequin would
previously have undertaken. Around breakfast time every morning, he
would inform me of the number of communiqués received overnight, and I
would tell him to handle them. He responded to general letters, filed private
ones for my later attention, and stalled anything official. He knew there
were only a few kinds of communiqué that I would permit myself to be
troubled with if they arrived: word of Bequin, a direct communication from
the Ordos, or anything from Fischig.
ON A BRIGHT morning early in my third week there, with dawn mist
fuming off the lawns where the early sun caught it, I was sparring with
Jubal Kircher in the pugnaseum.
It was the third morning we had done so. Realising how out of condition
I felt, I had commenced a regime of light combat work to tone myself up.
We were dressed in bodygloves with quilted shield-sleeves, and circled
each other on the mat with scorae, basket-hiked practice weapons from
Carthae.
Jubal was a weapons master but he was getting a little old, and on peak
form I had no trouble besting him. Where he truly excelled me was in
combat-lore and the techniques of military science, which he had studied all
his life. He used those that morning, preying on my softness and slowness,
overwhelming my superior strength and speed with patient expertise.
Three quarters of an hour, five rounds, five touches to him. His old lined
face was glowing with perspiration, but he was five times the winner I was.
‘Enough for today, sir?’ he asked.
‘You’re going easy on me, Jubal.’
‘Beating you five love straight is going easy?’
I hung my scorae over my belt and adjusted the straps of my sleeve-
shield. ‘If I was one of your security detail in training, I’d have five bruises
now to go with my five losses.’
Kircher smiled and nodded. ‘You would. But an ex-Guard bravo or a
slumboy trying to make my grade needs the bruises to remind him that
work here isn’t some well-paid retirement. I don’t believe you need to learn
that sort of lesson.’
‘None of us are too wise to learn.’ We both looked and saw Medea
entering the pugnaseum. She wandered around the edge of the mat, one
moment in the shadows of the wall panels, the next in the glaring yellow
oblongs cast by the skylights. She looked at me.
‘Just repeating one of your many aphorisms.’
I could tell something was up with her. Kircher shifted uncomfortably.
‘Let me spar with him,’ she said. I nodded to Jubal, who saluted,
Carthaen style, with his scora and left the circular room.
Medea took off her father’s cerise jacket and hung it on a window knob.
‘What’ll it be?’ I asked, taking a sip of water from a beaker on the
decanter stand.
She walked over to the armoury terminal and keyed on the screen, jump-
cutting rapidly through the graphic templates the monitor displayed. She
was dressed in a tight, semi-armoured bodyglove and her feet were clad in
training slippers. She had prepared for this, I realised.
‘Blades and power-bucklers,’ she announced, stopping the menu and
keying the authority stud.
There was a distant rattle and whirr as automated systems in the armoury
under the floor processed the selected weapons from their racks and
elevated them up into the ready rack in the wall next to the terminal. Two
buckler modules. Two swords, matching, each the length of an adult human
femur, single-edged and slightly curved with a knuckle-bar around the grip.
She tossed one to me and I caught it neatly.
I walked over to join her, placing my scorae in the rack that would return
it to storage. Then I took my buckler. It strapped around the left forearm,
supporting a round, machined emitter the size of a pocket watch. Engaged,
it projected a disc of shield energy the size of a banquet plate above the
back of my hand and forearm.
‘Attention, you have selected weapons of lethal force. Attention, you
have selected weapons of lethal force...’ The terminal issued the notice in
soft but urgent repeats.
I shut it off with a key-press.
‘We can use full body shields, if you’re worried,’ she said.
‘Why would I be worried? This is just sparring.’
We engaged our power-bucklers and faced each other across the centre of
the mat, slightly side on, shield towards shield, our blades held low in our
right hands.
‘Signal cue,’ I said.
‘Three,’ said the terminal speaker, ‘two, one... commence.’
Medea had been practising.
She swept round with her blade, and simultaneously parried my first
approach with her buckler which squealed and sparked off mine as their
fields met and repulsed.
I undercut defensively, gathering her blade in towards our shields so that
for a moment all four weapons were locked in a protesting knot of spitting
electrical energy.
We broke, and circled.
She came in again, leading with her sword. I fended it away with my
buckler, then again, and then for a third time as we continued to go around.
She was canny. Sword and buckler work was as old as all the worlds, and
the trick to staying alive was to use the shield more than the sword. The
trick to winning, however, was to use the sword more than the shield.
I kept my buckler to the front but, by seeming to be unguarded with her
own force shield lagging back as if casually forgotten, she was inviting me
to overstep or make a badly judged lunge.
I left my blade well alone, keeping it where she could see it, and using
my shield as Harlon Nayl had schooled me. The buckler was a weapon. Not
only could it block, it could lock or even break a blade. I had heard of some
duels where the small shield’s solid-energy edge had actually delivered the
killing stroke to an unprotected windpipe.
Medea rotated suddenly, driving my buckler aside with a swipe of her
own, and lashed in with her blade, dancing across the mat. I was forced to
parry with my sword, and then rally hard as she kept up the pressure.
Her blade sliced to within a handsbreath of my face and I cross-guarded
desperately with both blade and buckler.
She drove her own shield in under my guard and her own locked sword
and doubled me up with a punished strike to my midriff.
I fell onto the mat.
‘Enough?’ she asked.
I got up. ‘We’ll go again.’
She came at me again, leading with the blade as I had expected. I ducked,
swung round and feinted in time for her buckler to swing in to parry my
blade.
The spitting electrical dish tore the sword from my hand, stinging my
fingers.
Just as I had intended.
Her eyes were on my sword, distracted as it flew aside. With my now
free right hand, I grabbed her buckler arm above the elbow and pulled it
down so that her own power shield locked with her sword as she brought it
up. She stumbled. I smashed her across the extended shoulder with the flat
of my buckler and knocked her down.
I could have used the edge. I could have aimed for her exposed face. But
we were sparring.
‘Enough?’ I asked.
She said nothing.
‘Medea?’
She extinguished her buckler and pulled the strapping off.
‘What’s on your mind?’
Medea looked up at me. ‘I never wanted revenge,’ she said.
‘You told me you did.’
‘I know. And I suppose I did. Part of me. Revenge... it doesn’t feel...’
‘Satisfying?’
‘Like anything at all. Just empty. Stupid and empty.’
‘Well... I could have told you that. In fact, I think I did.’
I helped her up. We didn’t speak for a minute or two as we put the
weapons back in the rack and returned them to the underfloor store bay.
Then we took beakers of water from the stand, opened the pugnaseum’s
side doors and went out onto the sunlit terrace.
It was going to be a hot day. The sky was cloudless and the light white.
The shade of the woods seemed gloriously dark and inviting. The distant
inlet was hazy with glare and the sea glinted like diamonds.
‘Ever since I was old enough to understand what Fayde Thuring did,’ she
said, ‘I’ve wanted something. I’ve always presumed it was revenge.’
‘Revenge is a disguise for other, more valid emotional responses,’ I said.
She looked at me sourly. ‘Stop trying to be my father, Eisenhorn.’
She might has well have slapped me across the face. I had never thought
of it that way.
‘I only meant—’ I began.
‘You’re a very wise man,’ she said. ‘Very clever. Learned. You give
people the most profound advice.’
‘I try.’
‘But you don’t feel.’
‘Feel, Medea?’
‘You know things but you don’t feel them.’
Birds twittered in the edges of the woods and the orchards. Two of the
junior groundstaff were pressing the lower lawns with a heavy roller. I
wasn’t quite sure I knew what she meant.
‘I feel—’
‘No. You don’t feel the content of your advice, most of the time. They’re
just wisdoms, without heart.’
‘I’m sorry you think that way.’
‘It isn’t a criticism. Well, not really. You are just so driven to do what is...
right, that you forget to wonder why it’s right. I mean—’
‘What?’
‘I don’t know.’
‘Try.’
She sipped her water. ‘You fight the way Kircher tells you to fight
because he says that’s the best way to do it.’
‘It usually is.’
‘Of course. He’s an expert. That’s why you defeated me. But why is it the
best way to fight? Using those weapons, for example?’
‘Because—’
‘Because he told you? He’s right. But why is he right? You never wonder
about that sort of thing. You never wonder what mistakes or decisions were
made to arrive at that right way.’
‘I’m still not sure I follow you...’
She smiled and shook her head. ‘Of course you don’t. That’s my point.
You’ve spent your whole life learning the best way to do everything.
Learning the best way to fight. The best way to investigate. The best way to
learn, even. Did you ever wonder why those are the best ways?’
I put my glass down on the low wall at the edge of the terrace. ‘Life’s too
short.’
‘My father’s life was too short.’
I said nothing.
‘My father died and I wanted something, and you told me that it wasn’t
revenge. And you were right. Revenge is trash. Worthless. But why? What
was it I needed instead?’
I shook my head. ‘I was only trying to spare you the effort. Revenge is a
waste of time and—’
‘No,’ she said, looking at me directly. ‘It’s a displacement activity. It’s
something you can lock on to and do because you can’t do the thing you
really want to do.’
I had grown impatient. ‘And what might that be, Medea? Do you know?’
I asked.
‘I do now,’ she said. ‘Thuring killed my father. I needed something, and
it wasn’t payback. It was what he took from me. I needed to know my
father. If I’d ever had that, then I’d never have given Thuring another
thought.’
She was right. It was so obvious, it chilled me. I wondered how many
other, similar, obvious mistakes I had made in my life with my head so full
of certain knowledge and my heart so numb.
I looked back at the pugnaseum, and saw Midas’s cerise jacket handing
where she had left it, draped against the inside of one of the windows like a
trapped butterfly.
‘I can give you what you want,’ I said, ‘in part, at least. If you really
want it.’
I SUMMONED MY astropath, Vance, and requested that he made the
preparations. He suggested that evening might be a good time, when things
were quieter, and so I asked Jarat to serve a light dinner early to leave the
evening clear, and to leave out a cold supper in case we were hungry once
we were done.
At seven, Medea and I went to the reading room above the house’s main
library. I gave Kircher specific instructions that we were not to be disturbed.
Most of the household had retired early to private study or relaxation in any
case.
Psullus, the rubricator, was in the library, repairing some bindings that
were fraying at the spines.
‘Give us a while,’ I said to him.
He looked unnerved. Infirm with a progressive wasting disease, he
virtually lived in the library. It was his private world and I felt cruel ousting
him from it.
‘What should I do?’ he asked cautiously.
‘Go sit in the study, watch the stars come out. Take a good book.’
He looked around and sniggered.
My library was at the heart of Spaeton House, and occupied two floors.
The lower level was divided by alcoves of shelves and the upper gallery
was supported by those alcoves, giving access to further shelving stacks
lining the gallery walls. Soft glow-lamps hung from slender ceiling chains
and cast a warm, golden light all around, and the panelled reading lecterns
along the centre of the ground floor were fitted with individual reading
lamps that generated little pockets of brighter blue luminescence.
The place was comfortably warm, its atmosphere carefully controlled to
guard against any excess humidity that might damage the stored books.
There was a smell of wood polish, chemical preservatives, and the ozone
whiff of the stasis fields that protected the oldest and most fragile
specimens.
Once Psullus had gone, taking with him a copy of Boydenstyre’s Lives, I
led Medea up the brass staircase to the upper gallery and along to the heavy
door of the private reading room at the far end.
At the door, Medea paused and took a Glavian needle pistol from her
pocket.
‘I brought this,’ she said. ‘It was also my father’s, one of the pair made
for him.’
I knew that well enough. Medea still carried the matched pistols in
combat.
‘Leave it outside,’ I told her. ‘It’s never a good idea to attempt connection
through weapons. Even friendly heirlooms like that. The sting of death
attaches itself to them and you’d find that unpleasant. The jacket will be
fine.’
She nodded and left the gun on a bookshelf near the reading room door.
We went inside and found Vance waiting for us. The small chamber was
candle lit, with three chairs arranged around a cloth-covered table. The last
rays of sunset were glimmering in through the stained glass skylight.
We took our seats. Vance, a tall, stooping man with kindly, tired eyes,
spread Midas’s cerise jacket on the tablecloth. He had already been
meditating enough to put him near to the trance state, and I gently guided
Medea to a receptive calmness.
The auto-séance began. It is a simple enough psychic procedure, and one
which I have used many times for investigation and research. Vance was the
conduit, channelling the power of the warp. I focused my own mind-
strength to keep us centred. From the point of transition, the room took on a
cold, frosty light. Solids became translucent and fizzy. The dimensions of
the little reading room stretched and shifted impatiently.
Midas’s jacket, now a wisp of turquoise smoke, was swathed in the aura
it had accumulated over time, the echoes of its contact with human hands,
human minds.
‘Take it,’ I said. Touch it.’
Medea reached out her hand warily and brushed her fingers against the
edge of the aura, which bloomed and fluffed up at her touch.
‘Oh,’ she said.
We teased apart the psychic memories clinging to that garment until we
found her father. Midas Betancore, pilot, warrior, my friend. We coaxed his
phantom out of hiding.
It was no ghost, just the after-image he had left behind. An impression of
him, his looks, his voice, his emotions. A distant hint of his rich chuckle.
The faint odour of the lho-sticks he liked to smoke and the cologne he
chose to wear. We saw him young, little more than a boy. We saw him in
virile middle age, just a few years from his untimely death. There, at the
helm of the gun-cutter, itself now just a ghost too, the Glavian circuitry
inlaid into his hands marrying him profoundly to the craft’s controls. There,
steering a long-prow. There, watching the suns rise over the Stilt Hills of
Glavia.
We tasted his grief at the death of Lores Vibben, but I had Vance pass
along quickly to spare us the empathic pain. We clung to him through
several exhilarating dogfights, sharing the joy of virtuoso manoeuvres and
expert kills. We watched as he saved my life, or the lives of my
companions, over and again.
We listened at a dinner table while he made the company roar and clap
with an outrageous tale well told. It made all three of us laugh out loud. We
saw him, in silence, studying a regicide board and trying to fathom out how
Bequin had managed to beat him again. We watched him, through a
blizzard of coloured streamers, take his bride to the altar of the High
Church at Glavia Glavis. I glimpsed myself, alongside Fischig, Alizebeth
and Aemos, in the front pew, cheering and ringing our ceremonial bells
with the rest of the congregation.
‘That’s my mother!’ Medea whispered. The veiled woman on Midas’s
arm was stunning, exquisite. Jarana Shayna Betancore. Midas always did
have such good taste. Jarana lived still, far away on Glavia, a distinguished
widow and director of a shipwrighting firm. ‘She looks so young,’ Medea
added. There was a note of sadness in her voice. She hadn’t been back to
Glavia to visit her mother for many years.
Then, almost as if we were intruding, we saw Midas and Jarana
embracing on the shores of Taywhie Lake. Midas was beside himself with
happiness and excitement.
‘Really? Really?’ he kept asking.
‘Yes, Midas. Really. I’m really pregnant.’
I looked at Medea, saw the tears in her eyes.
‘We should stop now, I think,’ I said.
‘No, I want to see more,’ she said.
‘We should,’ I advised. I could tell that Vance was getting tired. And I
knew it wouldn’t be long before we stumbled into memories of Fayde
Thuring and the last hours. ‘We should stop. We—’
I was cut off by the sudden shrilling of my communicator. I cursed
loudly. Kircher had been told: no interruptions.
The sound shattered the séance at once. The blue light flashed and
vanished, and the room returned to normal with a sudden lurch that blew
out the candles and cast us painfully out of the warp. Vance slumped
forward, breathing hard, in distress. My head ached with a sudden piercing
pain. Medea pulled the jacket towards her across the table and buried her
head into its silk folds, sobbing. The walls were sweating.
Damn Kircher. Séances shouldn’t be broken like that. Any one of us
could have been badly damaged by the abrupt termination. As it was, we
were all emotionally dazed.
I got up. ‘Stay here,’ I said to them both. ‘Take a moment to recover.’
Vance nodded feebly. Medea was lost in her own storm of feelings.
I went outside and pulled the door closed, breathing hard. Yanking the
little hand vox from my pocket, I keyed the ‘respond’ rune.
‘This had better be good, Jubal,’ I said hoarsely.
Static crackled back.
‘Jubal? Jubal? This is Eisenhorn.’
Nothing. Then a quick blurt of frantic words I couldn’t make out. Then
static again.
‘Jubal?’
From somewhere distant, on the other side of the house, I heard a trio of
muffled cracks.
Las-fire.
I snatched up Midas’s needle pistol from the shelf where Medea had left
it and ran for the library door.
EIGHT
The fall of Spaeton House.
For our lives.
Sastre, loyal Sastre.
THE HALLS OF the house were quiet, with the lights dimmed, but I could
smell burning. I hurried down a carpeted crosswalk, arming the needle
pistol. Thirty rounds and a fully charged cell. I had no reload.
Tiny red lights were winking on the security monitor dials recessed into
the walls at regular intervals. I went to the nearest one, opened the cover
and was about to press my signet ring into the reader when I heard
movement.
I raised the gun.
Two maids and a houseman ran into view and yelped when they saw me.
‘Steady steady!’ I cried out, lowering the gun. ‘This way, come on!’
They ran up to me and cowered behind some ornamental plant stands.
‘What’s going on?’
They were too scared to answer at first. I saw that the youngest of them
was the new girl, Litu. She looked up at me with terrified, tear-pink eyes.
‘Litu? What’s going on?’
‘Raiders,’ she said, her voice breathy with panic, ‘Raiders, sir. Just
minutes ago, there was suddenly this great big bang from upstairs, and then
shooting. Men running around, with guns. I saw a man dead. I think it was
Urben. I think.’
Rocef Urben. One of my security detail.
‘He had all blood coming out of his face,’ she stammered.
‘The raiders, Litu. From which direction?’
‘From the west, sir,’ said the houseman, Colyon. ‘From the main gate, I
think. I heard Master Kircher say they were coming from the stable block
too.’
‘You saw Kircher?’
‘It was a bit mad, sir. I heard him as he ran past.’
I looked around. The smell of burning was getting stronger and I could
hear more shots.
‘Colyon,’ I said, ‘do you have your house keys?’
‘I’m never without them, sir,’ he said.
‘Good man. Go along here to the east porch and then get yourself and
these women into the gardens. Head for the orchards. Hide. Got a comm?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘If you don’t hear from me in the next twenty minutes, try and get all
three of you off the property. Look after them, Colyon.’
‘I will, sir.’
They ran off. I fitted my ring into the monitor and authorised access. The
little wall unit lit the air with a small diagnostic hologram. Incredibly, it
stated that all security systems, all detectors, all perimeter shields, were shut
down. They’d been shut down at source, using an authorised command
code.
How in the name of hell?
‘Jubal?’ I tried the vox again. ‘Anybody? This is Eisenhorn. Respond.’
The hand vox answered this time. A man’s voice, hard like stone.
‘Eisenhorn. You are dead, Eisenhorn.’
I went down through the staff quarters. It seemed like everyone had fled.
Doors were open and a few chairs were overturned. Half drunk cups of
caffeine, still steaming. A half-finished game of regicide in the butler’s
pantry. A pict-unit still playing a live broadcast from the arena at Dorsay. A
fallen lho-stick burning a patch in the carpet.
I stamped out the embers.
Through a door into the west landing I found Urben. He was dead all
right. He was sprawled with his back arched in the doorway. Laser fire had
blasted him open.
I was bent over him when I heard footsteps.
Three men came in through the other side of the landing, but I only saw
two of them. They were moving fast, with the fluid confidence of trained
killers. They were wearing combat armour made of rubberised mesh, their
faces hidden behind grotesque papier-mâché masks, the kind you can buy in
Dorsay’s market for the carnivals. They had cut-down las-rifles.
They fired as soon as they saw me, their shots striking the doorframe. I
barely had time to dive into cover. I heard the pip and chatter of their
microbead communicators.
One, sporting a gilded carnodon mask, moved in, running low, as another
in a mermaid mask gave cover.
From the doorway, I fired the needle pistol twice and put two tiny holes
through the carnodon leer. The raider folded up and crashed to the floor, his
knees buckling under him.
The mermaid fired again, repeatedly, and I switched to the other side of
the doorway.
Cease! I commanded, using my will. No reaction. They were psy-
shielded.
Someone had prepared.
I crouched and fired up at the chandelier. When it came crashing down,
the mermaid dived to the side and I caught him squarely with three needles,
any of which would have been a kill shot. The mermaid thumped
backwards heavily and brought a console table over as he fell.
I moved through the door, not realising the third one was there. His shots
grazed my shoulder and knocked me down hard.
There was a very loud bang.
I looked up.
‘Gregor?’
It was Aemos.
‘Gregor, I think I’ve jammed your bloody gun,’ he said.
I got up. Aemos was standing in a nearby doorway, fiddling with my bolt
pistol. The third, unseen raider had made a clotted dent in the plaster-work.
‘Give it to me,’ I said, snatching the bolt pistol and freeing the slide.
‘Thank you, Aemos,’ I added.
He shrugged. ‘It’s most perturbatory,’ he said. ‘Guns and me, we don’t
seem to get on and I always—’
‘Aemos, hush! What the hell’s going on?’
‘We’re under attack,’ he said.
‘I need a little more than that, old friend.’
‘Well, I know little more, Gregor. Boom, we’re under attack. No
warning, no nothing. Men everywhere. Lots of running around and
shooting. We thought you were dead.’
‘Me?’
‘They hit the study first. A grenade or something.’
‘Damn! Come with me. Stay close.’
We went upstairs. Skeins of smoke drifted through the air. I had the
needle pistol in one hand and the boltgun in the other. At the top of the
stairs we found two members of my house staff. They had been shot against
a wall.
‘Oh, that’s terrible...’ Aemos murmured.
It was. Someone would pay dearly for this outrage.
The door to my study was open and the smoke was issuing from inside.
‘Stay back,’ I whispered to Aemos and lunged in through the door.
The room was a mess. A missile or ram-grenade fired from the lawns had
blown out the main windows and turned the desk and chair into kindling.
Cold night air breezed in through the shattered casement and wafted the
smoke from the burning rug and shelving into the house.
There were three more raiders inside, ransacking the bookshelves and
trying to force open the file store. A man with a clown mask was raking
precious manuscripts, slates and scrolls out of a climate-controlled case into
a sack. Another in a serpent mask was repeatedly kicking the display case
in which Barbarisater was stored, trying to rupture it. A third, sporting a
grinning sun, was attacking the armoured sleeve of my file bureau with a
crowbar.
They all turned, reaching for their weapons.
Throne, they were fast! I had the drop, but they moved like lightning.
The serpent actually managed to loose a burst at me that went over my
diving head before I felled him with a bolt-round. His body hit the armour
glass cover of the sword case and left a streak of gore down it as it slid off.
The clown was slower, and his torso was punctured by needle rounds before
he’d dropped the sack. He just fell over, his mask crumpling as it struck
first one shelf edge, then another, then another on its way down to the floor.
The sun face threw the crowbar aside, and dived behind the ruins of the
desk even as I was rolling out of the end of the dive and re-aiming.
His blurt of las-fire met my hail of bolts and needles. I swear that at least
two of my bolt rounds were exploded in mid-air by his laser shots. But the
needles went clean through the desk and clean through him. He lolled back,
dead.
I got up and walked towards the destroyed end of my study.
That’s where I found Psullus. I’d sent him here just a few hours before.
The burning pages of Boydenstyre’s Lives were littered around. He’d been
sitting at my desk when the missile had taken out the window bay.
‘Dear Emperor... Aldemar...’ Aemos was bitterly shocked at the ghastly
sight.
I was simply furious by then. I pushed the needle gun, now virtually
spent, into my pocket and grabbed more bolt clips from the shelf by the
window.
‘We have to get out of here, Aemos,’ I said.
He nodded dumbly. I picked up the sack that the clown had been filling
and handed it to Aemos. ‘Fill it,’ I said. ‘You know what’s valuable.’
He hurried to obey.
I typed security codes into the cases containing Barbarisater and the
runestaff. The armour glass covers purred open.
Outside, there was a shrill whining noise and the beams of searchlights
crossed the lawns and the orchards. My attackers had air cover.
One final necessity. I opened my encoded void-safe and took out the
ancient, wretched copy of the Malus Codicium. I tucked it into my coat, but
Aemos had seen it.
‘Come on!’ I said.
‘One moment,’ Aemos replied, tugging a last few scroll cases into the
sack and then hoisting it onto his back.
‘Now, I’m ready,’ he said.
I went to the door, boltgun in one hand and Barbarisater in the other. The
staff was slung across my back. I could hear a fierce bout of shooting from
below, a serious firefight.
My loyal friend Jubal Kircher wasn’t going without a fight.
‘Follow me,’ I told Aemos.
IT HAD ONLY been a few minutes since the comm-alarm that had disrupted
the auto-séance. Already that tranquil encounter with the shade of Midas
Betancore seemed like ancient history.
The house was on fire. From the east wing, flames leapt up into the cool
night and filled the air with fluttering ashes and cinders. We cowered
behind a wall in the yard outside the kitchen, and got a look out across the
back lawn. Three heavy speeders had landed there, crouching like glossy
black insects on their extending landing claws. Their side hatches were
open and cabins empty. A fourth, and then a fifth, passed low overhead,
searchlights sweeping down as they riddled the back of the house with
cannon fire.
Five fliers. Each one was capable of carrying a dozen armed men. That
meant a small army was assaulting Spaeton House. Someone wanted me
and my staff eradicated. Someone wanted my precious secrets and trinkets
looted. And someone had enough money and influence to make those
things happen.
In truth, the house’s auto-defences should have easily held off the attack,
even an attack of this magnitude. Inquisitors make enemies. A fortified
residence is an occupational necessity.
But Spaeton House had been broken wide open. Its screens, void
shutters, lock-outs, motion detectors, sentry servitors, gun-pods...
everything had been inert when the attackers arrived.
They were mercenaries, I was sure of that. Highly trained, highly
motivated, utterly ruthless. But who had bank-rolled them, and why?
Answers later, I decided, as another series of explosions rippled across
the estate and lit the sky.
The stable block, which I used as a hangar and garage, had just gone up.
‘What about one of their vehicles?’ Aemos whispered, gesturing the
fliers on the lawn.
It was too risky. We’d be out in the open and the speeders were likely to
be guarded. I shook my head.
‘The water dock then?’ he suggested. ‘Maybe they haven’t got to the
boats?’
‘No, they had everything else covered. They knew the layout, knew to hit
the stables. They were briefed about this place inside and out.’
We went back inside, through the kitchen and across the little walled herb
garden into the scullery behind the dining hall. Smoke fumes strung the air
like silk hangings. I had one last means of escape, one I believed they didn’t
– couldn’t – know about.
Barbarisater twitched and I knew someone was coming. I pushed Aemos
back behind me.
Two figures came into view. One was Eleena Koi, the untouchable
assigned to the house. She was supporting Xel Sastre, one of Kircher’s men.
He had been wounded in the arm and shoulder.
‘Eleena!’ I hissed.
‘Lord! Thank the Emperor! We thought you were dead!’ Her narrow face
was taut with panic and Sastre’s blood was all over her brushed epinchire
gown.
I took a quick look at Sastre’s wounds. They were bad, but he’d live if we
could get him to an infirmary.
‘Have you seen any others? Kircher? Have you seen him?’
‘I saw him die,’ said Sastre. ‘They were driving us back, and he stayed to
hold the main hall. Took on twenty of the bastards.’
‘You sure he’s—’
‘They blew him apart. But not before he’d finished a good half dozen. He
told me... told me Kronsky let them in.’
‘What?’
‘Kronsky. The new guy hired last month. He betrayed the whole house.
Shut down the defence system.’
An inside job, as I had feared. Kircher had employed this Kronsky in
good faith, and no doubt scrupulously vetted his background and subjected
him to a mind-search. And I had welcomed Kronsky to my house. My
respect for the resources, skill and preparation of my unknown enemy grew.
A speeder howled by close outside, and the sound of its sporadic fire
shook the windows in their frames.
‘Can you keep up?’ I asked Sastre and Eleena. They nodded. ‘Where are
we going?’ asked Eleena.
‘Out through the dining hall, then quickly across the lawn of the rose
garden into the orchard behind the maze. After that, we swing south, make
our way to the front fence and then over the main road into the woods.’
I was describing a journey of over two kilometres, but no one balked.
Staying put was suicide.
I wanted to try my vox again and try to raise Medea, but knew it was
pointless. The raiders had all channels covered. Instead, I reached out with
my mind.
Medea... Medea...
To my amazement, I was answered almost at once. It was Vance.
We’re just outside the pugnaseum. Medea’s going to try and take one of
their fliers.
No! Stop her, Jekud. They’re too well guarded. Tell Medea ‘The Storm
Oak’. She’ll know what it means. If we get there first, I’ll wait as long as I
can.
The dining hall was in darkness and the buffed wood floor was littered
with glass. The windows had been blown in and the drapes rustled in the
night breeze.
We made our way across to the windows. Outside, the rose garden was
quiet and gloomy. The light of the fires cast long shadows across the
immaculate lawn.
We ducked back inside as a flier flew over. It paused above the lawn,
engines wailing, its downjets rippling the surface of the lawn. It was so
close I could hear the crackle and sputter of the cockpit intervox. The
searchlamp swung towards us, suddenly blinding, jabbing beams of frosty
white light into the dining hall. The glass litter glittered like a constellation.
Then the speeder moved off again, thundering around towards the back
of the house.
‘Go!’ I hissed.
We ran across the lawn. Aemos was surprisingly spry, but Eleena
struggled with Sastre. I dropped back and helped her with him. He kept
apologising, telling us to leave him.
He was a good man.
We reached the edge of the orchard and lost ourselves in the shadows of
the arbors, following the back of the maze. The air was richly scented with
the maze’s pungent privet and the sweet, acid smell of the ripening fruit.
Moths and nocturnal insects fluttered in the half light.
Well into the orchard, seventy metres from the house, we stopped for
breath. Weapons fire and shouting still echoed from the residence. I looked
around, trying not to look at the brilliant blaze of the buildings so I could
adjust to the gloom under the trees. They were low, graceful apple, tumin
and ploin, planted in orderly rows. The white bark of the tumin trees shone
like snow in the dimness, and some of the early ploin clusters had been
carefully bagged against scavenging birds. Scant days before, I had been
out here with the junior staff, joking as we gathered up the first tumin crop.
Altwald had been with us, taping the bags around the dark, swelling ploins.
That night, Jarat had served a glorious tumin tart as dessert.
Jarat. I wondered what had become of her in all this.
I never did find out.
Sastre stiffened and brought up his laspistol at a movement nearby, but it
was just a garden servitor, moving along the aisle of fruit trees, spraying
pesticide. Oblivious to the carnage nearby, it was simply obeying its nightly
programming.
We started forward again, but when I looked back, I saw several figures
coming out of the dining hall windows and spreading out across the rose
garden.
I bade the other three move ahead and crept back, staying as concealed as
possible, in case they had night-vision lenses or motion detectors.
I came upon the slow-moving servitor from behind, opened a back panel
as it trudged monotonously forward, and keyed in new instructions. It
moved off towards the rose garden, adjusting its route only to avoid trees. I
had increased its pace.
I was already on my way back to rejoin the others when I heard the first
few shots: the raiders, surprised by the sudden appearance of the servitor.
With any luck, it would delay or distract them. If they had been following
our movement, then maybe the servitor would convince them that was all
they had detected.
WE KEPT GOING until we were well clear of the maze and had left the
orchard behind. We crossed dark, overgrown paddocks, fumbling blindly.
The only light came from the haze in the sky behind us where Spaeton
House blazed.
We turned south, or a rough estimation of south. This was still my estate
– indeed the land I held title for stretched for several kilometres in all
directions – but this was uncultivated wood and scrubland. I could hear the
sea, tantalisingly out of reach beyond the headland behind us.
I wondered how far we could get before the raiders finished their
quartering of the house and realised I had slipped through their fingers.
We hurried on for another twenty minutes, passing through glades of
scrawny beech and wiry fintle. The ground was lush with nettles. We
reached a waterlogged irrigation ditch, and it took us several minutes to
manhandle Sastre across.
I could see the perimeter fence and the road beyond. On the far side of
that, the rising mass of the wild woodland, the heritage forests that still
covered two thirds of Gudrun, untouched and unmolested since the first
colonies were built there.
‘We’re almost there,’ I whispered. ‘Come on.’
Tempting fate, as always, Eisenhorn. Tempting fate.
Las-bolts slashed the air over our heads. A few at first, then more, from
at least four sources. They lowered their aim and the bright orange shots
ripped into the nettles, kicking up mists of sap and pulp. Two young larches
by the fence ditch were splintered. Dry gorse and fintle shuddered and burst
into flames.
A flare went up, bursting like a star, and damning us all with its invasive
light.
‘The fence! Come on!’ I cursed.
Behind us, by the light of the flare, I could see dark figures wading
through the nettles and emerging from the trees. Every few moments, one of
the figures would halt and raise his weapon, spitting dazzling pulses at us.
Further away, back at the bright pyre of Spaeton House, I saw two white
blobs of light rise and disengage themselves from the fireglow. Speeders,
called in, heading this way, chasing their beams across the paddocks and
woods.
We were at the fence. I channelled my fury into Barbarisater and slashed
open a hole two metres wide.
‘Get through!’ I yelled. Aemos went through the gap. Sastre stumbled
and fell, losing his grip on Eleena’s arm. I pushed her through the gap too
and went back for the wounded man.
Sastre had trained his pistol at the advancing killers, and was firing. He
was sitting down, leaning his back against the fence. He made two kills as I
remember, cutting down figures struggling forward in the weeds and
undergrowth fifty metres away.
‘Go, sir!’ he said.
‘Not without you!’
‘Go, damn it! You won’t get far unless someone slows them down!’
A rain of las-fire fell around us, puncturing the fence and throwing up
wet clods of earth. I was forced to turn and use Barbarisater to deflect
several shots. The blade hummed as it twitched and soaked up the power.
‘Go!’ Sastre repeated. I realised he had been hit again and was trying to
hide it. He coughed blood.
‘I can’t leave you like this—’
‘Of course you can’t!’ he snapped. ‘Give me a bloody weapon! This
damn las-cell is nearly spent.’
I crouched beside him and handed him my boltgun and my spare clips.
‘The Emperor will remember you, even if I don’t live to,’ I told him.
‘You damn well better had, sir, or I’m wasting my efforts.’
There was no time for anything further, no time even to take his hand. As
I clambered through the fence, I heard the first roaring blasts of the boltgun.
Eleena and Aemos were waiting for me on the far side of the road in the
fringes of the wild woods. I gathered them up and we ran into the darkness,
stumbling over gnarled roots, clambering up loamy slopes, surrounded by
the midnight blackness of the primordial forest.
The boltgun continued to fire for some time. Then it fell silent.
May the God-Emperor rest Xel Sastre and show him peace.
NINE
The Storm Oak.
Going back.
Making Midas proud.
FOR ALMOST AN hour, we plunged into the great darkness of the forest,
blind and desperate. In what seemed an alarmingly short time, we lost all
sight of the great conflagration we had left behind. The woodland, dense
and ancient, blocked it out.
‘Are we lost?’ Eleena mumbled in a faltering voice.
‘No,’ I assured her. Kircher, Medea and I had spent many hours hunting
and tracking in the wild woodlands, and I knew these fringes well enough,
though in darkness, there was an unhelpful depth of mystery and
unfamiliarity.
Once in a while, I noticed a landmark: a jutting tooth of stone, an old
tree, a turn in the terrain. Usually, I recognised such things once we were
right on them, and took a moment to adjust our bearings.
Twice, speeders passed overhead, their stablights backlighting the dense
foliage. If they’d possessed heat trackers, we would have been dead. But
they were hunting by searchlight alone. At last, I privately rejoiced, the
enemy has made an error.
We reached the oak.
Medea had named it the Storm Oak. It had been hundreds of years old
when lightning had killed it and left it a splintered, leafless giant, like a
shattered castle turret. The bark was peeling from its dead wood, and the
area around it was crawling with grubs and rot-beetles. It had grown in a
hollow, sprouting from the dark soil overhang of a scarp twenty metres
high. The oak itself was fifty metres tall from its vast, partly exposed root
mass to its shattered crown, and fifteen metres across the trunk.
I scrambled down into the hollow beneath its roots. When the lightning
had struck it, ages past, it had partially ripped the massive tree from the
ground, creating a cavern under its mighty foundations. The dank hole was
like a natural chapel, with roots serving as the cross-members for the
ceiling. The previous owners of Spaeton House had, I had been told, used it
as a chancel for private ceremonies.
Medea and I had decided to use it as a hangar.
No one else knew about this, except Kircher. We had all agreed it was a
dark, secret place to stow a light aircraft. A bolt hole. I don’t think we ever
really imagined a doom falling on Spaeton House like the one that
overwhelmed it that night, but we had played along with the idea it might
be wise to keep one transport tucked out of sight.
The transport in question was a monocoque turbofan flier, handmade on
Urdesh. Light, fast, ultra-manoeuvrable. Medea had purchased it ten years
before when she was bored, and had stored it in the main hangar at Spaeton
until one notorious night while we were away on a case when several junior
staff members had decided to take it for a spin, it being so much more racey
than the house shuttles and bulk speeders.
They’d had the damage repaired by the time we got home, but Medea
had noticed. Reprimands had followed.
Weeks later, when we found the Storm Oak during a hunting trip, and
devised the notion of a last ditch transport, Medea had moved the craft here.
We never actually thought we’d have to use it for escape. It was just an
excuse to park it away from the envious juniors.
I stripped off the tarp and popped open the hatch. The cabin interior
smelled of leather and the faint dampness of the forest.
Six metres long and finished in slate grey, the craft had a wedge-shaped
cabin that tapered to a short, V-vaned tail. There were three turbofan units,
one fixed behind the cabin under the tail for main thrust, the other two
mounted on stubby wings that projected from the cabin roof on either side.
The wing units were gimble-mounted for lift and attitude control. The cabin
was snug, with three rows of seats: a single pilot’s seat in the nose, with two
high-backed passenger seats behind it and a more functional bench seat
behind them against the cabin’s rear partition.
I strapped myself into the pilot’s seat and ran a pre-flight to wake the
systems up as Eleena and Aemos installed themselves in the pair of seats
behind me. The instrument panel lit up green and there was a low sigh as
the fans began to turn.
Eleena closed the hatch. The leaf-litter in the root cave began to twitch
and flutter.
We’d heard nothing from Vance since we entered the wild woodland. I
reached out with my mind, urging them to hurry up. There was no answer.
The plane’s power cells showed about seventy-five per cent capacity.
There were no alert or disfunction runes on the diagnostic panel. I went
through a final check. The craft was armed with a light las-lance, fitted
discreetly under the nose in a fixed-forward mount. We’d never used it, and
the instruments showed it was off-line. I entered a code to activate it, and
the screen told me it was stowed for safety and non-functional.
With the fans still idling, I got back out and went round to the flier’s
nose, crouching down to look beneath. The lance, little more than a slender
tube, was capped with a rubberised sleeve to muzzle the weapon and keep
dirt out of the emitter. I fumbled with the sleeve and removed it. Pulling the
safety sleeve off broke a wire clasp that allowed a small pin to be yanked
out. The lance was enabled.
I climbed back into the cabin, slammed the hatch and checked the
instruments. The weapon was now showing as on-line and I activated the
power-up function to charge its firing cells.
I’d just about finished when I felt it.
‘Sir, what’s wrong?’ Eleena cried out as I gasped and lurched forward.
‘Gregor?’ said Aemos, alarmed.
‘I’m okay... it was Vance...’ A quick, terrible psychic shriek from the
direction of the estate. A psyker in pain.
I tried to raise him again, but there was nothing except a blurry wall of
background anguish. Then I heard, for a second, his mind urging Medea,
urging her to run, run and not to look back.
Again I gasped as a second jolt of agony rippled through the mental
spectrum.
‘God-Emperor damn it!’ I cursed and threw the plane forward. The fans
wailed. We were instantly surrounded by a maelstrom of leaves and dead
twigs which rattled and pinged off the fuselage and windows. I nursed out
just a few centimetres of lift to clear the ground, with the wing fans angled
straight down, and we edged forward out of the Storm Oak’s root cave on
minimum thrust.
I kept one eye on the proximity scanner, which was throbbing red as it
detected the structure enclosing us. As soon as it signaled that the tail boom
had cleared the overhang of the root ball, I keyed in more lift and we rose,
swirling the leaves of the clearing around us in a whirling eddy.
We hovered and turned slowly, once, twice, as I let the auspex’s terrain
tracker scan the area. Then I lined up.
‘Uhm, Gregor?’ Aemos said, leaning forward and pointing over my left
arm at the illuminated compass ball. ‘We’re heading north.’
‘Yes.’
‘It, uhm, goes without saying north is the direction we came from.’
‘Yes. Sorry. We’re going back.’
I put the nose down, the wing jets whirred round to an aft three-quarter
thrust in their socket mounts, and the craft raced off into the darkness.
I SWEPT US through the forest at something like twenty knots, lights off.
Visibility was virtually zero, so I flew using a combination of the auspex
and the proximity scanner, reading the green and amber phantoms of tree
boles and branches as they loomed, steering around and under. Every now
and then I cut it too fine, and the collision alert sounded as something swept
across the screen in vivid red. There were plenty of near misses, but only
once did I hit something – a small branch that snapped away, thankfully.
Aemos and Eleena both cried out involuntarily.
‘Relax,’ I urged them.
We’d have made better – and safer – progress above the forest canopy,
but I wanted to stay concealed for as long as possible.
In vain, I reached out to find Vance’s mind.
Barely avoiding a massive low branch, we came down a long slope under
the trees, and the auspex showed me that we’d reached the edge of the
woodland. The road was just ahead.
Through the tree-line, I could see light, pulsing white. Another flare. I cut
the forward thrust, and crept forward on down-angled jets, just a drifting
hover.
I could see out over the road and the fence into the paddocks and scrub
south of Spaeton House we had toiled through on foot to make our escape.
The whole area was bathed in a cold, grey luminosity, a wobbling flicker
cast by the dying flare. Black shapes, dozens of them, scrambled through
the grasses and weeds, spread in a line, searching.
Medea, I willed. She couldn’t answer. She was a blunt. But I prayed she
could hear.
Medea, I’m close.
There was a sudden surge of activity to the north-east, around a spinney
of fintle trees. The flash of las-fire. Two fresh flares banged up, making
everything harsh black and white. The raiders were moving towards the
spinney.
They had someone cornered, pinned down. I knew in my gut it was
Medea.
With my lights still off, I gunned the flier forward, going low over the
road and fence and across the paddock reaches. The downwash sliced a
wake in the grasses. Figures turned as we swept over them. By the flare-
light, I glimpsed carnival faces.
I hugged the ground, scattering some of the raiders, and powered towards
the spinney. Las flashes were coming my way now.
My thumb flipped the safety cover off the control stick’s firing stud.
There was no aiming mechanism for the fixed lance except the craft itself.
If the flier was pointing at something, then the lance was too.
I squeezed the stud.
The lance fired a continuous beam for as long as I held down the trigger.
It had no pulse or burst option. A line of bright yellow light, pencil thin,
sliced out from under the nose and ripped into the scrub by the spinney. I
saw mud and plant debris spray up from the furrow it cut. The plane’s nose
was dipped. I was falling short. I nudged the flier’s snout up and fired
again.
Two raiders collapsed, sliced through by the beam. Several saplings and a
mature fintle at the edge of the spinney came down in a shower of leaves.
With the plane moving, it was damn hard to aim at all.
Twenty metres short of the trees, I pulled up in a shallow hover. Serious
fusillades were zipping at us now. The craft wobbled as shots struck the
lower hull.
I fired for a third time, holding the flier level and gently rotating her right
to left as I held the trigger down. Raiders threw themselves flat to avoid the
lethal beam of light passing over them. Several didn’t make it. The lance
simply sectioned them, clean through flesh, bone and armour. I must have
hit a power pack or a grenade, because one exploded in a sheet of flame.
More shots thumped into the fuselage from the rear. I surged forward
again, sweeping around the west side of the trees.
I saw Medea on the auspex. She was running clear of the spinney at the
north end, breaking cover. It took me a moment to find her by eye. Just a
dot in the long weeds. A bright dot. She was wearing her father’s cerise
jacket. I realised she must’ve come out into the open to give me a chance to
set down and reach her. The thin trees in the spinney were far too tightly
packed.
Las-bolts chased her. She turned and fired back with a handgun, still
running.
You’re clear! Get down!
I saw her turn, seeing where I was. Then she was hurled face first into the
grass by a las-shot.
‘Medea!’ I accelerated hard, pushing us back into our seats. ‘Aemos! Get
ready with the side hatch!’
I got as close in to the patch of weeds where she had fallen as I dared.
The down-thrust of the plane could cause serious injuries. We jolted hard as
I set down, throwing the throttles to idle. Aemos was opening the hatch, but
he was old and slow and scared. Eleena couldn’t reach over because he was
blocking her.
I leapt out, pushing Aemos back into his seat, and thumped down into the
wet nettles and burry fex-grass. The night air was sudden and cold. Another
flare bloomed above us, and I realised the echoing spit I could hear was the
enemy guns discharging in my direction.
I ran forward, searching for her.
‘Medea! Medea!’
Now I was on the ground, it was nigh on impossible to tell where in the
thigh-high grass she’d fallen.
‘Medea!’
A las-round stung the air to my left. The closest of the raiders, running
across the paddock, was only a few dozen metres away.
I realised I was unarmed. I’d given my boltgun to Sastre, and
Barbarisater and the staff were stowed in the flier behind me.
No, I had Medea’s Glavian needle pistol. It was still in my coat pocket. I
dragged it out and fired, aiming it with both hands.
My first shot hit the nearest raider and he fell over into the grass. My
second shot winged another and he too disappeared into the rough scrub.
I glanced at the needler’s mechanical dial. Two rounds left.
Bending low, I searched the grass with increasing frenzy as shots whined
in close.
‘Medea!’
And there she was, face down in the thick scrub. There was a bloody,
burned hole in the back of her silk jacket.
I dragged her up and threw her limp body over my shoulder. The
autopistol she had been using slipped heavily from her slack hand.
I stooped and grabbed it. The clip was half-full.
I swung round, trying to keep her from falling, and fired the autopistol
wildly at the advancing enemy, relishing the satisfying roar and recoil of the
hefty solid-slug weapon. Needle guns were elegant and deadly, but you
barely knew you’d fired them.
This thing, chrome and square-nosed, kicked like a yurf, and spent brass
cases rang as they flew from the pumping slide.
I started to run back to the plane, expecting a shot in the back any
moment. I heard las fire, but it wasn’t coming from behind me. Eleena Koi
was braced in the open side hatch of the flier, laying down covering fire
with a laspistol I hadn’t realised she was carrying. Aemos had got into the
back, onto the bench seat, giving Eleena access to the door.
Aemos reached out and gathered Medea in his arms. Eleena seized her
too and the three of us bundled the girl into the rear beside Aemos.
I was wishing so hard she wasn’t dead.
Eleena fired one last time and fell back into the passenger seats. I jumped
in, yelling at her to slam the hatch.
There was no time to strap in. Multiple shots slammed against the
aircraft’s flank. A window panel burst. Dents appeared in the inner skin,
spalling fragments off the hull.
I hoisted us off the ground, and spun us to face the charging raiders.
I think, although I can’t be sure, I said something singularly unedifying
as I pressed the trigger. Something like: ‘eat this, you bastards.’
I don’t believe I actually hit any of them but, by the Golden Throne, they
took cover.
‘Sir!’ Eleena yelled over the scream of the turbofans.
A ball of light was approaching from the other side of the spinney. I
couldn’t see the speeder, just its stablight shining like a white dwarf against
the night sky.
Time to go.
I kept it low, but pulled away south across the paddock at full thrust,
accelerating all the time. We were doing forty, forty-five knots by the time
we reached the road. The woods loomed.
In an instant, I weighed my options. Go high, over the trees, and be a
clear target for any pursuer. Go through, lights off, and drop speed
dramatically to avoid collision. Go through, lights on.
I picked the third way.
The flier’s lamps kicked on, lighting a cone of space ahead of us. Even
with the lights, and the auspex and the proximity alarm, this course was
borderline suicide. Within a few seconds, having only just avoided a head-
on smash with a mature spruce, I had to drop the speed to thirty.
‘You’re... you’re gonna get us killed!’ Eleena wailed.
‘Be quiet!’ The black shapes of tree trunks whipped past on either side,
forcing me to turn and bank hard, repeatedly, jagging left, then right, then
left again. Branches, some as massive as trees in their own right, swept over
us like arches or under us like bridges. Several times, we exploded through
sprays of canopy, the engine-out alarm pipping as the fans fought to clear
away the leaf debris choking them. The phantoms on the scanner screen
were almost constantly red.
Eleena started to say an Imperial prayer.
‘Say one for us all,’ I barked. ‘Aemos! What’s Medea’s condition?’
‘She’s alive, thank the stars. But her breathing’s not right. Perhaps a
collapsed lung, or internal cauterisation. She needs a medic, Gregor.’
‘She’ll get one. Make her as comfortable as you can. There’s a medi-pak
in the locker behind you. Patch her wound.’
Apart from being an insane death wish, flying at speed through dense,
ancient forest at night was baffling. Simply avoiding collision required such
concentration, I kept losing my bearings. A few forced turns to the left, say,
pointed us east. Correcting that, and evading an oak to the right, and we
were turned west. We were zig-zagging through the wild woodland, and a
zig-zag is not the fastest route of escape.
At least four of the five speeders I had seen during the raid were after us.
Two were following us directly through the trees, about five hundred metres
behind us. The other two had gone up and over the tree cover, making much
better time, chasing hard to pass over us and get ahead.
They were ex-military models; I’d seen that much from the glimpse I’d
got of them parked on the lawns. Bigger power plants than this nimble
Urdeshi turbofan; bigger, and better armoured. And their cannons, mounted
on racks in the doorframes, meant they could, essentially, fire in any
direction. They didn’t have to be pointing at their target.
The auspex started to chime and I saw hard light flash down through the
leaf cover above us, breaking through in shafts like a sun breaking through
low cloud. One of the fliers above the forest was matching us for speed.
I jinked and evaded, not so much to lose him as to avoid instant
obliteration against the bole of a tree. I saw the forest floor convulse and
ripple as the door gunner fired down at us.
So I banked hard, one wing down, right around a colossal fanewood, and
shot off in a westerly direction. The overhead lights disappeared for a
moment, but then reappeared, travelling fast, parallel to us, to the left. A
tree, flashing past to my right, lost its bark in a blitz of diagonal crossfire.
Damn them. I was fairly certain they had no heat or motion tracking
instruments. They were following the glow of my lamps underlighting the
canopy.
I killed the lights but unfortunately didn’t kill my speed. The proximity
alarm squealed, and though I yanked on the stick, we struck a trunk a
grazing blow.
We wobbled hard. The engine-out alert shrilled a continuous note. The
starboard fan had stalled.
I went to hover, and pressed restart on the starboard unit, hoping that it
had simply been jolted dead by the impact. If the casing or the fan itself
were buckled, restarting might be very messy indeed for all of us.
The dead fan turned over and coughed. I tried again. Another mewling
wheeze. Twenty metres behind us, the forest was coming to pieces in a
deluge of wood pulp, bark scraps and pulverised foliage as the flier high
above tried to smoke us out with a sustained salvo.
The starboard fan whipped into life on the third attempt. Staying at hover,
I played the stick back and forth and side to side, pitching and yawing the
craft, dropping its nose and then its tail, dipping the stubby wings, just to
make sure I hadn’t lost any attitude control. It seemed alright.
I looked over my shoulder and saw Eleena staring at me, her face corpse-
pale. Aemos was cradling Medea.
‘Are we all right, Gregor?’ he whispered.
‘Yeah. I’m sorry about that.’
The glade to our left suddenly lit up with vertical shafts of light and was
pummelled by cannon fire. They were still searching blindly.
I had a sudden moment of recall. A void duel. Seriously outnumbered.
Midas flying by the seat of his well-tailored pants. I remember him glancing
at me from the controls of the gun-cutter, and saying: ‘Mouse becomes cat.’
Mouse becomes cat.
Still hovering, I rotated the flier towards the blitzed glade and then raised
the nose slowly, pointing it at the light source above the trees. Aiming it at
the light source.
I squeezed the toggle, just for a second.
The lance beam seared up into the backlit canopy. There was a brief flash
and then a nine tonne metal fireball that had once been a speeder simply
dropped down into the clearing, smashing through the branches, ripping
apart and hurling flaming debris in all directions.
‘Scratch one,’ I said, smugly. Well, it’s what Midas would have said.
There were lights behind us, zooming closer through the forest. Keeping
the lamps off, I nudged us away from the wreckage inferno and turned in
behind a twisted antlerbark that had slumped sideways in old age. Curtains
of moss draped from its weary branches.
I watched the lights approach, easing the nose around to follow the
nearest one. They had slowed down, hunting for signs of us. The nearest
lights were tantalisingly close, but obscured by a line of fat oaks.
The other one zipped in towards the blazing crash site.
I swung us up, leading the flier’s nose towards the coasting speeder.
It came into view, stablights sweeping the woodland floor.
I fired again.
The shot was pretty good. It sheared the tail boom off the speeder. With
its rear end discharging blue electrical arcs, it spun out of control, end over
end. It made a mess of a giant fanewood, and vice versa.
The other speeder came out from the cover of the oaks, firing right at us.
The shots rent aside the curtains of moss.
I realised someone had had the sense to bring night vision goggles. They
could see us.
I TRIED ONE shot, missed and then turned tail, kicking in the floods and
raising the speed as high as I dared. The proximity alert screen was just an
overlapping red blur now, and we were all thrown around by the violent
turns I was forced to make.
The pilot of the speeder chasing us was good. Distressingly good. Like
the mere foot troops, he was clearly the best of his kind money could buy.
He stuck to my tail like a leech.
Pushing thirty-eight knots, I caromed through the dense trees, pulling
gees sometimes when the turns demanded it. He raced after me, following
my lead and enjoying the gain of my turbowash slip stream.
The chase was verging on balletic. We snaked and criss-crossed between
trees, banked and looped like dancing partners. Several times I stood on a
wingtip coming round one side of a big tree and he mirrored the move
coming round the other. Fans screaming, I pulled a hard turn to the north,
and then rolled, reversing, turning south. He overshot, but was back a
moment later, accelerating fast onto my tail. Tracer rounds winked past me.
Two hard jolts came in quick succession, and the instruments confirmed
what I suspected. We’d been hit. I was losing power: not much, but enough
to suggest a battery had been ruptured or disconnected. He was firing again.
Stitching lines of tracer shells spat past the cockpit. Now I had distress
runes lighting up on my control panels.
Something drastic was needed, or we’d be his latest cockpit stripe. I
thought about cutting the fans and dropping to make him overshoot, but at
the speed we were going, we’d crash and burn.
‘Hold on!’ I yelled.
‘Oh shit,’ said Eleena Koi.
I killed the thrust and went vertical.
We exploded up through the canopy into the sky, shredding branches
around us. The speeder shot by underneath. Astonished, he tried to bank
round to re-engage, but my manoeuvre had flummoxed him. Just for a
moment, but long enough.
He didn’t trim his thrust as he tried to make the turn. A tree took one
stabiliser wing clean off and that was the last I saw of him except for the
series of impact explosions he made under the trees below us.
I was shaking, my hands numb. Exhaustion punched into me. The
concentration had been so terribly intense.
But Midas, I was sure, would have been proud of me. He’d forever been
trying to teach me his skills, and he’d declared on more than one occasion
that I’d never make a combat pilot.
In his opinion, I had the essential reflexes and strength, but I never saw
the big picture. And it was always that last, overlooked detail that got you
killed.
That last, overlooked detail came in from the north, across the treetops,
autocannons flashing.
TEN
Down.
Doctor Berschilde of Ravello.
Khanjar the Sharp.
IT WAS THE fourth speeder that had been hunting us. Before I could even
let out a curse, its streaming cannon fire had severed our tail boom and
mangled the aft fan, shredding off its cover and twisting the still-spinning
props.
We started to rotate violently. The cabin vibrated like a seizure victim.
Eleena screamed.
I wrestled with the controls, fighting the bucking stick. I cranked the
wing fans to vertical and throttled up to break the drop. The flier crunched
down through upper branches, glanced off a main bough, and nose dived.
I stood on the rudder and yanked back the stick.
‘Brace!’ I yelled. That was all I had time to say.
We side-swiped a fanewood’s trunk, a collision that ripped off the port
fan and stripped the monocoque’s hull paint down to the bare metal and
bounced once off a peaty ridge of moss and leaf mould. Then we rose again,
yawing to the left as the remaining turbofan screamed to the edge of its
tolerance trying to gain some sort of lift. The engine-out alarm shrilled as
the fan stalled, overcome by the pressure. We fell then, sideways, survived a
headlong impact with an oak that crazed the windshield and slammed into
the loamy earth, slithering a good fifty metres before we rocked to a halt on
our side.
I didn’t black out but the long silence following the crash made it feel
like I had. I blinked, lying on my shoulder against the side hatch. Eleena
moaned and Aemos started coughing. The only other sound was the tinkling
patter of the shattered windscreen scads gradually collapsing into the cabin.
I got up and clambered over the seats.
‘Eleena? Are you hurt?’
‘No, sir... I don’t think so...’
‘We have to get out. Help me.’
Together we dragged the coughing Aemos clear and went back for
Medea who was still, mercifully, unconscious.
The searchlights of the speeder lanced down through the hole we had
made in the canopy, poking around.
Any moment now...
Eleena and I dragged the other two into the shelter of a hollow a good
distance from the downed aircraft.
‘Stay here,’ I whispered to her. ‘Give me your weapon.’
Silently, she offered me her stubby laspistol.
‘Stay down,’ I advised and ran back to the wreck, retrieving my staff and
my sword. I tossed the runestaff into the undergrowth to keep it out of sight
and drew Barbarisater.
The speeder was coming down through the upper branches, trying to pick
out the flier with its stablight. I tucked the sword and pistol into my belt and
lunged up into the lower branches of the gros beech that overlooked our
crash site.
The tree was huge and gnarled. Grunting, I swung myself up into the
main boughs and then further up into the web of thinner branches.
The speeder hovered into view, crawling slowly towards the smoking
wreck, its searchlight playing back and forth. I could see the masked side-
gunner in the open door, one hand on the yoke of the pintle-mounted
autocannon, the other on the bracket of the lamp.
The speeder descended. I climbed higher, up into the lofty reaches of the
beech, until I could climb no further and the hovering speeder was directly
below me.
The pilot said something. I distinctly heard the crackle of his intervox.
The door gunner replied and let go of the lamp, setting both hands on the
cannon’s grips, turning it to aim down at the crumpled flier.
The glade below me filled with flashes and booms as he riddled the
airplane with his cannon fire. The valiant little Urdeshi craft shredded like
tinfoil.
The door gunner stopped shooting and called down to his pilot.
Now or never.
I let go of the branches and dropped straight onto the roof of the speeder.
It rocked slightly beneath me. I steadied myself, crouched down, gripped
the upper frame of the door hatch and swung in, boots first.
The gunner was bent over with his back to the hatch, getting a fresh
ammunition box from the wall rack. My boots connected with his lower
back and shunted him face-first against the cabin wall. I landed beside him
as he staggered backwards, his hands clutching at his broken face, grabbed
him by the arm and propelled him backwards out of the hatch. We were ten
metres up.
The pilot gave a muffled grunt as he looked round and saw me. A second
later, the muzzle of the laspistol was pressed against the corner of his jaw.
‘Set down. Now,’ I said.
I prayed I was dealing with a mercenary and not a cultist. A merc would
know when to cut his losses, and bargain to live for another day and another
paycheck. A cultist would fly us into the nearest tree, gun or no gun.
Making his motions very slow and clear so I could be sure to read them,
the pilot cut the speeder’s main thruster, and sank us to the forest floor.
‘Shut us down,’ I said.
He obeyed, and the lift units hummed to a halt. The dashboard went
blank apart from a few orange standby lights.
‘Unstrap. Get out.’
He unbuckled his harness and slowly pulled himself up out of the pilot’s
seat as I covered him with the pistol. He was a short but well-built man in
ablative armour and a grey flight helmet with a breathing visor.
He jumped down from the speeder’s side hatch and stood with his hands
raised.
I got down next to him. ‘Take off the helmet and toss it back into the
speeder.’
The pilot did as he was told. His skin was pale and freckled, his thinning
hair shaved close. He regarded me with edgy blue eyes.
‘Unzip the suit.’
He frowned.
To the waist.’
Keeping one hand raised, he drew the zipper of the ablat-suit down,
revealing an undervest and shoulders marked with old, blurry tattoos. The
psi-shield was a small, disc-shaped device hung round his neck on a plastic
cord. I snapped it off and tossed it into the undergrowth. Then I used my
will.
‘Name?’
‘Nhh...’ he growled, grimacing.
‘Name!’
‘Eino Goran.’
I nudged my mind against his. It was like rubbing up against something
sheathed in plastic.
‘Right, we both know that’s an emplated identity. A rash job from the
feel of it. Real name?’
He shook his head, his teeth clenched. Emplate IDs were cheap enough
to buy on the black market, especially a fairly poor quality one like this.
They were fake personalities, usually sold with matching papers, psi-woven
over the subject’s persona like a fitted dust cover on a piece of furniture.
Nothing fancy. If you had the money, you could buy fingerprints and retinas
to match. If you really had the money, a new face too.
This one was like a false wall erected in a hurry to ward off casual minds.
It lacked any sort of real history, not even vague biographical engrams. A
mind mask as cheap and unrealistic as the carnival faces his comrades had
worn.
But, though poor, it had been put in place with great force. I tried to shift
it, but it wouldn’t budge. That was frustrating. It was obviously false, but I
couldn’t get past it.
There was no time to worry at it now.
Out! I willed, and he collapsed unconscious.
‘Eleena! Aemos! Come on!’ I shouted, dragging the limp man back into
the speeder. I checked him for weapons – there were none – and then lashed
his hands behind his back with a length of cable from the speeder’s pulley
spool. By the time Eleena and Aemos reached me, carefully bearing Medea,
I had the pilot gagged and blind-folded, and tied to one of the speeder’s
internal cross-members.
We got everything aboard – the items we had rescued from my study, the
runestaff, all of it – and secured Medea in a pull-down cot in the aft of the
speeder’s crew bay. Then I got into the pilot’s seat and, once I’d made sense
of the control layout, got us airborne.
I EDGED UP just above the treetops, running unlit. The moon was up and
the night was clear, apart from a brown smudge against the stars away to the
north. The smoke from my burning estate, I had no doubt. There was no
sign of anything else in the air. Hugging the tips of the trees, I turned us
south.
ONCE WE WERE underway, I checked out the cockpit. It was clearly an ex-
military flier, bought for the purpose in my opinion. Insignia mouldings had
been chiselled off, service numbers erased with acid swabs. Apart from the
basic controls, the cabin was provided with several socket racks where
optional instrument modules could be bolted in. Only a vox-set had been
fitted. There were gaps where an auspex, a terrain-reader and night vision
displays might have gone, and also slots for a navigation codifier and a
remote fire control system that would have slaved the door weapon to the
pilot and done away with the necessity of a separate gunner. Whoever had
supplied the mercenaries with their vehicles had provided only the most
basic package. An armed troop-lifter with an old model vox-caster comm.
No automated systems. No clue to origin or source.
But it had decent power and range – over a thousand kilometres left in it
before it would need a recharge. Something to get them in, lay down cover
and get them out again.
The forest flickered by beneath us. The vox burbled intermittently, but I
had no idea of the codes or cant they were using, and little desire to let
anyone know the flier was still operational.
After a while, it shut off. I unplugged it, pulled it out of its rack and told
Eleena to toss it overboard.
‘Why?’ she asked.
‘I don’t want to risk it having a tracker or transponder built into it.’
She nodded.
I tried to get our bearings manually, using the basic instrumentation,
working to reconstruct a map of the area in my head. It was pretty much
guesswork. Dorsay, the nearest main city, was perhaps a hour west of us
now, but given the scale of the operation mounted against me, I felt going
there would be like flying into a carnodon’s den.
There were small fishing communities and harbour towns on the east side
of the Insume headland, the closest now more than two hours away. Madua,
a chapel town in the south-east, was in range. So was Entreve, a market city
on the fringe of the wild woodland. So were the Atenate Mountains.
I thought about calling the arbites on the vox, but decided against it. The
attack on Spaeton House must surely have been noted by sentries at Dorsay,
especially once the main fires started, but no emergency support units had
come. Had the arbites been paid to turn a blind eye? Had they been more
complicit still in the raid?
Until I understood who and what my enemies were, I could trust no one,
and that included the authorities and even the Inquisition itself.
Not for the first time in my life, I was effectively alone.
I headed for the mountains. For Ravello.
RAVELLO IS A hill town in the flanks of the western Atenates, situated at
the foot of the Insa Pass, on the shores of a long freshwater lake that forms
the headwaters of the great Drunner. It has a small but distinguished
universitariate specialising in medicine and philology, a brewery that
exports its lake-water ale all over Gudrun, and a fine chapel dedicated to
Saint Calwun, which houses to my mind some of the best religious frescoes
in the sub-sector.
It is a quiet place, steep and densely packed, its old buildings lining
narrow hill streets so tightly their green copper roofs overlap like plate
armour. From the air, it looked like a patch of dark moss clinging to the
blue slopes of the Itervalle.
The sun was rising as we approached from the north. The air was clear, a
baking blue. We had left the wild woodland in the first touches of dawn,
and climbed up into the foothills, following the line of the Atenate Minors
up into the higher altitudes. The Itervalle was high enough to have cloud
cover round its peak, but across the lake, the first of the great giants rose:
Esembo, ragged like a tooth; Mons Fulco, a violet triangle stabbing the sky;
snow-capped Corvachio, the sport and bane of recreational climbers.
We were nearly out of power and the speeder was getting sluggish. I
dropped us to road level and came in through the western gate. There were
no traffic and no pedestrians. It was still early in the morning.
The streets were paved with the same blue-grey ouslite that the buildings
were constructed from, bright in the sunlight, dark in the shadows of the
narrow streets. We passed through a square where a student lay sleeping off
a night’s drinking on the lip of a small fountain, along a wider avenue
where ground cars and civilian fliers were parked in a herringbone, and then
turned up a narrow street and climbed the hill out of the glare of the sun. I
opened the speeder’s windows and breathed in the fresh, clear air. The
muted sounds of the flier’s engines washed back at me, reflected oddly by
the tall, shuttered faces of the dwellings on either side of the steep, paved
lane.
It had been a long time, but I still knew my way around.
WE PARKED IN a cul-de-sac alley just off the lane, little more than a blunt
courtyard where a mountain spurra struggled to grow against the face of a
wall. The spurra, or at least its little yellow spring flowers, was the emblem
of Saint Calwun, and votive bottles and coins littered the little stone basin
the tree was growing from.
A first floor shutter twitched at the sound of our engines, and I was glad I
had asked Aemos to stow the door gun during our flight. At least we
resembled a private transport.
‘Stay here,’ I told Eleena and Aemos. ‘Stay here and wait.’
I WALKED BACK down the street in the quiet morning. I was still wearing
the boots, breeches, shirt and leather coat I had put on before the auto-
séance the night before, but Aemos had lent me his drab-green cloak. I
made sure I was displaying no insignia or badge of office, except my signet
ring, which would pass notice. Medea’s autopistol, reloaded with shells
from a box magazine we found on the speeder, was tucked into the back of
my belt.
A stray dog, coming up from the town centre towards me, paused to sniff
my cloak hem and then trotted on its way, uninterested.
The house was as I remembered it, halfway down the lane. We had
passed it on the way up, and now I made certain. Four storeys, with a
terrace balcony at the top under the eaves of the copper-tiled roof. The
windows were shuttered and the main entrance, a pair of heavy panelled
wooden doors painted glossy red, were bolted shut.
There was no bell. I remembered that. I knocked once and waited.
I waited a long time.
Finally, I heard a thump behind the doors and an eyeslit opened.
‘What is your business so early?’ asked an old man’s voice.
‘I want to see Doctor Berschilde.’
‘Who is calling?’
‘Please let me in and I will discuss it with the doctor.’
‘It is early!’ the voice protested.
I raised my hand and held my signet ring out so its design was visible
through the eyeslit.
‘Please,’ I repeated.
The slit shut, there was a rattle of keys and then one of the doors opened
into the street. Inside was just shadow.
I stepped into the delicious cool of the hall, my eyes growing accustomed
to the gloom. A hunched old man in black closed the door behind me.
‘Wait here, sir,’ he said and shuffled away.
The floor was polished marble mosaic that sparkled where scraps of
exterior light caught it. The wall patterns had been hand-painted by
craftsmen. Exquisite, antiquarian anatomical sketches lined the walls in
simple gilt frames. The house smelled of warm stone, the cold afterscents of
a fine evening meal, smoke.
‘Hello?’ a voice filtered down from the stairs above me.
I went up a flight, onto a landing where shutters had been opened to let
the daylight stream in.
‘I’m sorry to intrude,’ I said.
‘Gregor? Gregor Eisenhorn?’ Doctor Berschilde of Ravello took a step
towards me, registering sleepy astonishment.
She was still a very fine figure of a woman.
I think she was about to hug me, or plant a kiss on my cheek, but she
halted and her face darkened.
‘This isn’t social, is it?’ she said.
I WENT BACK to the speeder and flew it round to the private walled
courtyard behind her residence where it was screened from view. The
doctor’s old manservant, Phabes, had opened the ground floor sundoors,
and stood ready with a gurney for Medea. Eleena, Aemos and I followed
them inside. I left the pilot, still in his will-induced fugue state, tied up in
the flier.
Crezia Berschilde had put on a surgical apron by then, and met us in the
ground floor hall. She said little as she examined Medea and checked her
vitals.
‘Take her through,’ she told her man, then looked at me. ‘Anybody else
injured?’
‘No,’ I said. ‘How is Medea?’
‘Dying,’ she said. All humour had gone from her voice. She was angry
and I didn’t blame her. ‘I’ll do what I can.’
‘I’m grateful, Crezia. I’m sorry I’ve troubled you with this.’
‘She ought to go to the town infirmary!’ she snapped.
‘Can we avoid that?’
‘Can we make this unofficial, you mean? Damn you, Eisenhorn. I don’t
need this!’
‘I know you don’t.’
She pursed her lips. ‘I’ll do what I can,’ she repeated. ‘Go through into
the drawing room. I’ll have Phabes bring some refreshment.’
She turned on her heel and disappeared into the house after Medea.
‘So,’ said Aemos quietly, ‘who is this again?’
DOCTOR CREZIA BERSCHILDE was one of the finest anatomists on the
planet. Her treatises and monographs were widely published throughout the
Helican sub-sector. After years of practice in Dorsay and, for a period, off-
world on Messina, she had taken up the post of Professor of Anatomy here
at Ravello.
And, a long time ago, I had nearly married her.
One hundred and forty-five years earlier, in 241 to be exact, I had lost my
left hand during a firefight on Sameter. The details of the case are
unimportant, and besides, they are recorded elsewhere. I was fitted with a
prosthetic, but I hated it and never used it. After two years, during a stay on
Messina, I had surgeons equip me with a fully functioning graft.
Crezia had been the chief surgeon during that procedure. Becoming
involved with a woman who has just sewn a vat-grown clone hand onto
your wrist is hardly a way to meet a wife, I realise.
But she was quick-witted, learned, vivacious and not put off by my
calling. For years we were involved, on and off, first on Messina, then at a
distance, and then on Gudrun once she had moved back to Ravello to take
up her doctorate and I had based myself at Spaeton House.
I had been very fond of her. I still was. It is difficult to know if I should
use a word stronger than ‘fond’. We never did to each other, but there are
times I would have done.
I had not seen her for the best part of twenty-five years. That had been
my doing.
We sat in the drawing room for over an hour. Phabes had opened the
windows and the day’s brilliance blasted in, turning the tulle window nets
into hanging oblongs of radiant white. I could smell the clean, fresh chill of
mountains.
The drawing room was furnished with fine old pieces of furniture, and
filled with rare books, surgical curios and display cases full of immaculately
restored antique medical apparatus. Aemos was quickly lost in close study
of the items on display, murmuring to himself. Eleena sat quietly on a tub
chair and composed herself. I was fairly sure she was inwardly reciting the
mind-soothing exercises of the Distaff. Every few minutes she would
absently brush a few strands of brown hair off her slender face.
The doctor’s man returned with a silver serving cart. Yeast bread, fruit,
oily butter and piping hot black caffeine.
‘Do you need anything stronger?’ he asked.
‘No, thank you.’
He pointed to a weighted silk rope by the door. ‘Ring if there’s anything
you need.’
I poured caffeine for us all, and Aemos helped himself to a hunk of bread
and a ripe ploin.
Eleena tonged half a dozen lumps of amber sugar crystal into her little
cup. ‘Who did it?’ she asked at length.
‘Eleena?’
‘Who... who raided us, sir?’
‘The simple answer? I have no idea. I’m working on possibilities. It may
take us a while to find out, and first we have to be secure.’
‘Are we safe here?’
‘Yes, for the time being.’
‘They were mercenaries,’ said Aemos, dabbing crumbs from his wrinkled
lips. ‘That is beyond question.’
‘I thought as much.’
‘The pilot you captured. You saw the tattoos on his torso.’
‘I did. But I couldn’t read them.’
Aemos sipped his hot, sweet drink. ‘Base Futu, the language of the
Vessorine janissaries.’
‘Really? Are you sure?’
‘Reasonably so,’ he said. ‘The man has a repatriation bond written on his
skin.’
I considered this news. Vessor was a feral world on the rimward borders
of the Antimar sub-sector that bred a small but hardy population famous for
its vicious fighters. Attempts had been made to form a Guard regiment
there, but the Vessorine were hard to control. It wasn’t that they lacked
discipline, but they found loyalty to Terra too cerebral a concept. They were
bonded into clan families, understanding simply the material wealth of land,
property, homestead and weapons. As mercenaries, therefore, they excelled.
They would fight, peerlessly, savagely and to the death, in the Emperor’s
name, provided that name was stamped on high denomination coinage.
No wonder the attack on Spaeton House had been so direct and efficient.
In hindsight it was remarkable any of us had got out alive. I was glad I
hadn’t known who they were at the time. If I’d been told I was facing
Vessorine janissaries, I might have frozen up... instead of charging them
head on to rescue Medea.
I took off the cloak Aemos had lent me, and also my leather coat, and
rolled up the sleeves of my shirt. The sun was warming the drawing room. I
had just taken the pistol out of my belt to check it when Crezia came into
the room. She was peeling off surgical gloves and when she saw the gun in
my hands, her already sour look became fiercer. She pointed sharply at me
and then gestured outside.
‘Now,’ she said, curtly.
I pushed the weapon into the folds of the cloak on the table and followed
her out, across the hall into a sitting room hung with oil paintings and
hololithic prints. The shutters in here were still shut and she made no
attempt to open them. She turned up the lamp instead.
‘Shut the door,’ she instructed.
I pushed the door shut. ‘Crezia—’ I began.
She held up a strong, warning finger. ‘Don’t start, Eisenhorn. Just don’t.
I’m this damn close to throwing you out! How dare you c—’
‘Medea,’ I interrupted firmly. ‘How is she?’
‘Stable. Just about. She was shot in the back with a laser weapon and the
wound was left untreated for several hours. How do you think she is?’
‘She’ll survive?’
‘Unless there are complications. She’s on life support in the basement
suite.’
‘Thank you, Crezia. I’m in your debt.’
‘Yes, you damn well are. You’re unbelievable, Eisenhorn. Twenty-five
years. Twenty-five years! I don’t see you, I don’t hear from you and then
you turn up, unannounced, uninvited, armed and on the run, so it would
appear, with one of your party shot. And you expect me just to take this in
my stride?’
‘Not really, I know it’s a terrible imposition. But the Crezia Berschilde I
knew could cope with an emergency now and then. And she always had
time for a friend in need.’
‘A friend?’
‘Yes. You’re the only person I can turn to, Crezia.’
She snorted scornfully and tugged off her apron. ‘All those years, I was
happy to be the one you could turn to, Gregor. And you never did. You kept
me at arm’s length. You never wanted me involved in your business. And
now...’ She let the words trail off and shrugged unhappily.
‘I’m sorry.’
‘You bring guns into my house—’ she hissed.
‘I probably shouldn’t tell you about the mercenary tied up in my speeder
then,’ I said.
She snapped round to look at me, incredulous, and then shook her head
with a grim smile. ‘Unbelievable. Twenty-five years and you roll up at
dawn, bringing trouble with you.’
‘No. No one knows I’m here. That’s one of the reasons I came.’
‘Are you sure?’
I nodded. ‘Someone raided my residence last night. Razed it. Murdered
my staff.’
‘I don’t want to hear this!’
‘We barely got out alive. I needed sanctuary and medical help for Medea.
I needed to find somewhere I knew would be safe.’
‘I don’t want to hear any more!’ she snarled. ‘I don’t want to be tangled
up in your battles. I don’t want to be involved! I have a nice life here and
—’
‘You do need to hear it. You need to know what’s going on.’
‘Why? I’m not going to get involved! Why the hell didn’t you go to the
arbites?’
‘I can’t trust anyone. Not even the authorities, right now.’
‘Damnation, Eisenhorn! Why me? Why here?’
‘Because I trust you. Because my enemies may have every known
associate of mine on the planet under observation, every arbites precinct,
every office of the Ministorum and the Imperial Administratum. But our
relationship is secret. Even my closest friends don’t know we were ever
associated.’
‘Associated? Associated? You know how to flatter, you pig!’
‘Please, Crezia. There a few things I need to do. A few things I need to
arrange. A little help I need to ask of you. Then we’ll be gone and you’ll
never have to worry about this again.’
She sat down on a chaise and rubbed her hands together anxiously.
‘What do you need?’
‘To begin with, your forbearance. After that... access to a private vox-
link. I’ll need you to summon an astropath, if that’s in any way possible,
and also have your man purchase clothes and other items for us.’
‘The town tailors will be closed today.’
‘I can wait.’
‘There may be clothes here.’
‘Very well.’
‘There’s a vox-link in my study.’
I WENT TO look in on Medea, who was sleeping peacefully in the
scrubbed medical suite built into the basement of Crezia’s town house, and
then retired to the room Phabes had prepared for me. Eleena and Aemos
were in adjoining rooms, resting.
I bathed and shaved, doing both activities on automatic as my mind
worked things through. I discovered my body had acquired several new
bruises since the day before and a las-graze across the thigh I hadn’t even
noticed. My clothes were dirty, torn and smoke-damaged, and the breeches
were covered in burrs and sticky grass seeds.
Phabes had laid some clothes out in my room, several changes of male
attire. I recognised they were my own. I’d kept clothes here over the years,
mostly soft, informal wear to change into when I visited. Crezia had stored
them. I didn’t know whether to be delighted or alarmed. All these years, and
she hadn’t thrown out the possessions I’d left in her territory. They were
fresh too, as if aired or laundered regularly. I realised that Crezia Berschilde
had always expected me to return one day.
Perhaps it was the manner of my return that had upset her – that I came
back for her help and not simply for her. I couldn’t blame her for that. I
wouldn’t be pleased to see me now, considering the trouble I was in. And
not if I had broken all links of friendship two and a half decades before.
The chapel bells were ringing in the town below, calling the faithful for
worship. Lakeside inns were opening up, and the smells of roasting and
herbs were carried on the breeze.
I chose a dark blue cotton shirt with a thin collar, a pair of black twill
trousers and a short flat-fronted summer jacket of black suede. The boots I
had been wearing the night before would have to make do, but I scrubbed
them clean with a cloth. I wanted to tuck the pistol into my jacket, but I
knew how Crezia felt about guns, so I left it, with Barbarisater and the
runestaff, under the mattress of my bed. The sacks of scrolls and
manuscripts Aemos and I had rescued from Spaeton were with him in his
room.
I had little else with me: my signet ring, a short-range hand vox, some
coins and my warrant of office – a metal seal in a leather wallet. It was the
first time since Durer that I missed my rosette. Fischig still had that,
wherever he was.
As I hung my leather coat up in the wardrobe, I felt a weight in it and
remembered I did have something else.
The Malus Codicium.
It was an infernal book, thrice damned. I knew of no other copy in
existence. One half of the Inquisition would kill me to get their hands on it,
the other half would burn me for having it in my possession.
Quixos, the corrupt veteran inquisitor I had finally brought to account on
Farness Beta, had built his power upon it. I should have destroyed it when I
destroyed him or at least surrendered it to the ordo. I had done neither.
Using it, secretly studying it, I had increased my abilities. I had captured
and bound Cherubael using its lore. I had broken open several cult
conspiracies thanks to the insight it had given me.
It was only a small thing, fat, soft-covered in simple black hide, the edges
of its pages rough and hand-cut. Innocuous.
I sat down on the corner of the bed and weighed it in my hands. Splendid
mid-morning sunlight shone in through the casement, the sky was blue, the
slopes of the Itervalle visible from the rear of the house a soft lilac. But I
felt cold and plunged into darkness.
I’d never really thought about why I had saved that hideous work for my
own ends. Knowledge, I suppose. Curiosity. I had encountered prohibited
artefacts many times in my life, the most notorious being the accursed
Necroteuch. That loathsome thing had possessed a life of its own. It stung
to the touch. It lured you in and coerced you into opening it. Just to be near
it was to poison the mind.
But the Codicium was silent. It always had been. It had never seemed
alive, like the other toxic, rustling volumes I have encountered. It had
always been just a book. The contents were disturbing, but the book itself...
I wondered now. The moment it had come into my possession, things had
started to change. Starting with Cherubael and on, on to the bleak events on
Durer.
Maybe it was poisoning me. Maybe it was twisting my mind. Maybe I
had crossed far too far over the line without realising it, thanks to its baleful
influence.
Perhaps that was a measure of how evil it was. That it was painless.
Invisible. Insidious. The moment you touched the Necroteuch, you knew it
was a vile thing, you knew you had to resist its seductive corruption. You
knew you were fighting it.
But the Malus Codicium... so infinitely evil, so subtle, seeping slowly
into a man’s soul before he even knew it.
Was that how a servant of the Emperor as great as Quixos had become a
monster? I had always wondered why he had never seen what he was
becoming. Why he was so blind to his own degeneration.
I opened the drawer of my night stand and put the book inside. As soon
as we were clear of Ravello, I would have to deal with it.
I WENT DOWN to Crezia’s study and found the vox-link. There was a
hololithic pict unit too, and I tuned that in. Morning broadcasts, weather,
planetary news. I watched for some time but there was no mention of any
incident in the Dorsay region. I had anticipated as much, but it was still
unnerving.
I used the vox and listened in to the Imperial channels, eavesdropping on
arbites frequencies, PDF transmissions, Ministorum links. Nothing. Either
no one knew what had happened the night before at Spaeton House, or they
were staying ominously silent.
I needed an astropath. If I was going to contact anyone, it would be off-
world. I had no choice.
I really couldn’t trust anybody on the planet.
THE FLIER WAS still parked in the back courtyard. Phabes had been good
enough to run a power cable from the house and the craft’s batteries were
recharging.
It was hot in the yard. Insects buzzed in the thick spill of flowering
bucanthus that covered the side wall.
The mercenary was awake. He twisted his head from side to side as he
heard me approach, blind and dumb.
I tore the tape from his mouth and then filled a dish-cup with water from
a bottle I had borrowed from the kitchen. I held it up to his mouth.
‘It’s just water. Drink it.’ He pursed his lips and turned his head away.
‘You’ll dehydrate in this heat. Drink.’
He refused again.
‘Look, if you dehydrate, you’ll become weak and far more vulnerable to
my questions and mind probes.’
He paused and swallowed, but then shied away from the cup again as I
brought it up.
‘Have it your way,’ I said and put the dish down. The Vessorine were
famously hardy. It was said they could go without food or water for days
when battle demanded it. If he wanted to show off, it was fine by me.
I rose and went over the body of the speeder carefully. I had borrowed a
scanner wand from Crezia’s study, and set it to detect high and low band
signals... transponders, beacons, codes. I found nothing. For good measure.
I swept the Vessorine too. Both flier and prisoner were clean. If the
mercenaries were looking for us, they wouldn’t find us because of the craft
or pilot.
It had taken me half an hour to sweep the vessel. I went back to the pilot.
The mid-morning sun was now high enough to throw sunlight in through
the flier’s side hatch, and he was obviously feeling the heat because he’d
drawn his legs up into what shade remained.
I offered the water again. No response.
‘Tell me your name,’ I said.
His jaw clenched.
‘Tell me your name,’ I repeated, using the will now.
He shuddered. ‘Eino Goran,’ His voice was dry and slurry.
‘And before it was Eino Goran, your name was what?’
‘Nngh...’
His resolve was strong. The Vessorine were a blunt race, with a high
frequency of untouchables. Part of their martial training was to learn
methods of resisting interrogation, and at first I thought he might have some
well-developed mind-trick to wall out psychic impulsions.
But as I questioned him further, I began to suspect it was more to do with
the emplated identity he was wearing. I’d tried to pick it away, but it still
wouldn’t budge. Crude and simple it may have been, but it was psychically
riveted into place. Part of that profound fixture, I was sure, was acting as a
screen. It wasn’t that he wouldn’t answer. He couldn’t.
‘Gregor?’
I looked out of the hatch and saw that Crezia had come out into the yard.
‘Gregor, what the hell are you doing?’
I got out of the flier and drew her back towards the garden doors. The
Vessorine had undoubtedly heard her use my name. It couldn’t be helped.
‘That man’s tied up like damn cygnid!’ she said.
‘That man would kill me given the chance. He’s tied up for all our sakes.
I have to ask him questions.’
She glared at me. She had changed into a long gown of blue satin with an
epinchire trim. Her straw-blonde hair was tightly braided behind her head
and held up by two golden pins. She was beautiful and haughty, just as I
remembered her. Crezia had high cheekbones, a generous mouth, and pale
brown eyes given to expressions of passion and intelligence. The only
passion I had seen in them since my arrival had been fury.
‘Like a cygnid,’ she repeated. ‘I won’t have it. Not in my house.’
‘Then what do you suggest? Have you a secure room, one that can be
locked from outside?’
‘Provide you with a cell for him? Pah!’ she scoffed.
‘It’s that or the flier.’
She thought about it. ‘I’ll have Phabes clear out a box room upstairs.’
‘No windows.’
‘They all have damn windows! But the room I’m thinking of has just a
small vane-light. Not big enough for anyone to get through.’
‘Thank you.’
‘I want to check him over.’
It was no good arguing. She inspected the man carefully.
‘Don’t be alarmed. I’m Doctor Cr—’
‘He really doesn’t need to know your name. Or mine. Think about it.’
She drew a deep breath. ‘I am a doctor. I’m only going to check on your
health. Do you have a name?’
He shook his head.
‘He’s using the name Eino Goran.’
‘I see. Eino, this situation is unpleasant, but if you co-operate with me,
and with Gr... with my associate here, it will work out for the best. Soon.’
Associate. I could feel the spiteful relish she put into that word.
Crezia looked at me disapprovingly. ‘He needs to drink and eat. Drink
particularly, in this heat.’
‘Tell him, not me.’
‘You need to drink, Eino. If you don’t drink, I’ll have to put you on a
fluid drip.’
He allowed her to feed him the dish, and sipped slowly.
‘Very good,’ she said. Then to me, ‘His bonds are far too tight.’
‘That’s not going to change.’
‘Then get him up and walk him round a little. Tie his hands the other
way.’
‘Later perhaps. If you knew what he was, what he has done, you
wouldn’t be so humane.’
‘I’m a officer of the Medicae Imperialis. It never matters what they’ve
done.’
We went back into the drawing room.
‘His identity is emplated. I need to get past the barriers.’
‘To find out who he really is?’
‘To find out who he’s working for.’
‘I see,’ She sat down and bit at a fingernail. She always did that when she
was troubled.
‘You have medical stocks here. Zendocaine? Vulgate oxybarbital?’
‘You’re joking?’
I shook my head and sat down opposite her. ‘Deadly serious. I need a
psychoactive or at least an opiate or barbiturate to loosen his will power.’
‘No. Absolutely no way.’
‘Crezia...’
‘I will not be party to torture!’
‘It is not torture. I’m not going to hurt him. I just need to open his mind.’
‘No.’
‘Crezia, I am going to do it. I have the mandate of the Holy Inquisition to
perform interrogation, and these circumstances permit me an even greater
latitude of emergency powers. Wouldn’t you rather it be done under your
expert supervision?’
IN THE LATTER part of the afternoon, we brought the Vessorine inside, and
put him in the box-room Phabes had cleared. There was nothing in the room
but a bedframe and mattress. I removed his blindfold and then covered him
with the autopistol as Aemos removed his bindings.
Crezia looked on, pointedly saying nothing about the weapon.
‘Unfasten your tunic again,’ I said.
Crezia started to say something but I cut her off. ‘You’ll need to get at his
arm, won’t you, doctor?’
There was another reason for getting him to disrobe. Aemos carefully
studied the man’s tattoos, making notes. The Vessorine just stood there,
stripped to the waist, sullen. He refused to make eye contact.
I noticed he was slender but whipcord tough. The marks of old scars
dotted his torso. I’d taken him to be a reasonably young man, but either he
was older than he looked, or his short life had been barbarically tough.
Aemos finished. ‘I’ll get it translated properly. But it’s what I thought it
was.’ He turned to go downstairs. I stopped him and passed him the pistol.
‘Cover him, please.’
Aemos waited while I re-tied the merc’s hands. I tied them in front of his
body now, and then lashed his ankles together and tied off the end of that
cord to the bedstead.
‘Sit down,’ I told him. He sat. I took the weapon back from Aemos,
tucked it into my belt and sent him on his way.
‘If you will, doctor?’
She looked at me. ‘Just like that? Don’t you want to give him the chance
to volunteer first?’
There was no point, but I wanted to keep Crezia on side.
‘Tell me your name,’ I said.
‘Eino Goran.’
‘Tell me your real name.’
‘Eino Goran.’
I shot a warning look at Crezia and used the will. I focused it in the
Vessorine’s direction so she would be spared, but it still made her shiver.
He gurgled a non-verbal response.
‘Now, please.’
Crezia quickly injected twenty millilitres of zendocaine into the man’s
upper arm and drew back. Zendocaine is a psychoactive, a synaptic
enhancer that causes a flurry of cortex activity disguised by a soothing
opiate. The man coughed, and after a few moments his eyes took on a
glassy sheen.
Crezia checked his blood pressure.
‘Fine,’ she said.
I placed my hand on the man’s temple, and eased my mind into his. He
was relaxed and offered no resistance, but his mind was lively. An ideal
balance if I was going to prise off his emplated identity.
I tried a few test questions, both verbally and mentally. His answers were
slurred.
‘What is your name?’
‘Eino Goran.’
‘What is your age?’
‘Forty sstannard.’
‘What is your height?’
‘Two anna third kwen.’ That was a good sign. I had no idea what a
‘kwen’ was, but I’d take a bet it was a Vessorine measure.
‘Where are we?’ I continued. ‘Inna room.’ ‘Where is the room?’ ‘Inna
house. Dunno.’ ‘On what world?’ ‘Gudrun.’
‘What colour is the sky?’ ‘Hnn, this sky?’ ‘Yes. What colour is this sky?’
‘Blue.’
‘What other sky might I have meant?’ ‘Dunno.’
‘What is my name?’ ‘Gregor.’
‘How do you know that?’ I asked, without reacting. ‘She call it you.’
Crezia glanced at me nervously. ‘Who does that make me?’ ‘Dunno.’
‘Who might I be? Who do you suppose?’ ‘Eisssnhorn.’
‘Why do you know that name?’ ‘Job.’
‘What job?’
‘Be merc work. Pay job.’ ‘Tell me more about that.’ ‘Dunno more.’
‘What is your name?’ I asked the mercenary again. ‘Told you. Eino
Goran.’ ‘Where are you from?’ ‘Hesperus.’
‘What colour is the sky?’ ‘Blue. Defn’ly’ ‘What is your name?’ ‘Eino.
Goran. Eino Goran. Eino Goran.’
The words came out like a mountain stream, overlapping, light, without
any meaning. ‘Where are you from?’ I went on. ‘Hesperus... uh. Dunno.’
‘What does the tattoo on your upper body signify?’ ‘Bond.’
‘In what language?’ ‘Dunno.’
‘Is it a repatriation bond?’ ‘Uh huh.’ ‘That’s a mercenary custom, isn’t
it?’
‘Uhm.’
‘It states, for any captor to see, that if you are returned to your home
world, or an agency of your home world unharmed, a bond will be paid. Is
that correct?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Are you a mercenary?’
‘Yessss.’
‘What colour is the sky?’
‘Blue. No, yes... blue.’
‘What is your name?’
‘Uh...’
‘I asked you, what is your name?’
‘Wait... I know this. Be hard to think...’ His eyes rolled in their sockets.
‘What is your name?’
‘Dunno.’
‘Are you a mercenary?’
‘Yeah...’
‘Was I your target last night?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Who was your target last night?’
‘Eisenhorn.’
‘Am I Eisenhorn?’
‘Yes.’ He looked at me, but his eyes remained glassy, unfocussed.
‘What were your orders?’
‘Chill ’em all. Burn the place.’
‘Where did the orders come from?’
‘Clansire Etrik.’
‘Is clansire a rank?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Is Clansire Etrik a Vessorine janissary?’
‘Yes.’
‘Are you a Vessorine janissary?’
‘Yes.’
‘What is your name, janissary?’
‘Sire! Vammeko Tarl, sire!’
He paused and blinked, not sure what he had just said. Crezia was staring
at me.
‘You’re doing very well, Tarl,’ I said.
‘Uh huh.’
The emplate was shredding away from his mind like damp paper now. I
went in for the kill with my full willpower now his mind was open.
‘Where were you hired?’
‘Twenty weeks ago. Nnngh. Twenty weeks.’
‘Where was that?’
‘Heveron.’
‘What were you doing there?’
‘Looking for work.’
‘Before that?’
‘Gnnh... be hired for a border war. Local governor hired us. But the war
fizzled out.’
‘And you found a new client?’
‘The Clansire did. Good pay, for a longterm hire. Off-world, transit paid.’
‘To do what?’
‘They didn’t tell us. Shipped us off to someplace.’
‘Where?’
‘Gudrun?’
‘Was it Gudrun?’
‘Yeah...’ A shudder went through him.
‘And the job, in outline?’
‘Hardware and fliers provided by client. Told to hit this place on a
headland. Chill everyone.’
‘Whose place was this?’
‘Be someone called Eisenhorn.’
‘How many men were hired?’
‘All of us. The entire clan.’
‘And how many men is that?’
‘Eight hundred.’
I paused. Eight hundred?
‘All for this job on Gudrun?’
‘No. Be seventy of us for that. The rest for other jobs.’
‘What other jobs?’
‘Wasn’t told. Gah... my head aches.’
Crezia touched my sleeve. ‘You must stop,’ she whispered. ‘He’s
beginning to hyperventilate.’
‘Just a few more questions,’ I hissed back.
I looked at Tarl. He was sweating and rocking slightly in his seat as his
breaths came quick and fast.
‘Where did you stage before the raid?’
‘Nnh... Piterro.’ A small island in the Bay of Bisheen. Interesting.
‘What was the name of the ship that brought you here?’
‘The Beltrand.’
‘What was the name of your client?’
‘Dunno.’
‘Did you ever meet him?’
‘No.’
‘Did you ever meet any of his agents?’
‘Yeah... uhhnn! It hurts!’
‘Gregor!’
‘Not yet! Tarl, who was the agent?’
‘Woman. Psyker. She came to emplate us the night before the raid.’
‘She personally fixed your identity veils?’
‘Yes.’
‘What was her name?’
‘Call herself Maria. Maria Tarray.’
‘Picture her in your mind, Tarl,’ I ordered. I got a brief but vivid flash of
a sharp featured woman with long, straight black hair. Her eyes were what I
remembered most. Kohl-edged, large and green like jade. She seemed to
look into my head. I snatched back.
‘Are you all right?’ Crezia asked.
‘Yes, I’m fine.’
‘We’re going to stop now,’ she told me straight. ‘Right now.’
‘Right now?’
‘That’s what I said.’
The janissary had sunk back on the bed, his skin puffy and damp. He
closed his eyes and moaned.
‘He’s coming down. Now he’s feeling the disruptions of your mind
probe,’ I could see she was shaking slightly. She’d felt them too, second
hand.
‘One last question.’
‘I said we were stopping now and I meant it. I have to stabilise him.’
I held up my hand. ‘One more. While he’s still open. We come back later
or tomorrow and he’ll have closed up. And you don’t want to do this again,
do you?’
‘No,’ she relented.
‘Tarl? Tarl?’
‘Go ‘way.’
‘What was the name of your client? What was the name of Maria
Tarray’s boss?’
The Vessorine murmured something.
‘What was that?’ whispered Crezia. ‘I didn’t catch it.’
I had. Not verbally, but in my mind. Something blocked out, something
he hadn’t been able to say even before if he’d wanted to. As he collapsed
into psi-fugue, the last shreds of his emplated veil melted away and the final
name tumbled out.
‘He said Khanjar,’ I told her. ‘Khanjar the Sharp.’
ELEVEN
Adept Cielo.
Death notices.
Dangerous kindness.
I WOKE BEFORE dawn. It was still twilight outside, and the curtains of my
room swayed in the cold breeze.
I got dressed, and went downstairs. On the way, I checked on Tarl. He
was profoundly asleep, curled on his bed. Crezia had made sure he was
alright, given him a secondary, mild opiate to reduce his trauma and
covered him with a blanket. He’d been out for the best part of fourteen
hours. Crezia had almost flipped out with fear when she discovered the
captive in her box room was a Vessorine janissary.
I checked Tarl’s bindings, and he groaned softly as I disturbed the
blanket.
AEMOS WAS ALREADY up. Drinking caffeine he had brewed himself, he sat
in Crezia’s study, listening to the early morning vox broadcasts.
‘Couldn’t you sleep?’ I asked.
‘I slept fine, Gregor. But I never sleep for long.’
I fetched another cup and poured caffeine from his pot.
‘There’s nothing about us,’ he said, gesturing to the vox.
‘Nothing?’
‘It’s most perturbatory. Not a word, not even on the arbites band.’
‘Someone managed to hire eight hundred Vessorine killers, Uber. They
have clout. The news has been withheld. Or censored.’
‘The others will know.’
‘How do you mean?’
‘Fischig, Nayl. The moment they don’t get a response from Spaeton
House, they’ll know something is up.’
‘I hope so. What did you make of our friend’s tattoos?’
‘Base Futu, just as I supposed. I cross-checked it using the doctor’s
cogitator.’ He took out a note-slate and adjusted his eye-glasses. ‘This mark
bears witness that Vammeko Tarl, a janissary, is owned by the Clan Etrik,
and a bond of ten thousand zkell will be paid for his repatriation. He is of
flesh made and his flesh speaks for him.’
Aemos looked up at me. ‘Strange practice.’
‘Totally in keeping with the Vessorine mindset. Janissaries are objects.
Material items. You might as well keep a cannon or a tank as a prisoner of
war. They have no political affiliation, no loyalties within the particular
frame of whatever conflict they’re involved with. No use as a hostage.
Putting that little incentive on each one makes things clear and simple. Puts
a simple price on the matter and dissuades a captor from simply killing
them.’
‘How much is ten thousand zkell, then?’
‘Enough, I should think.’
‘What do we do with him when we leave?’
Now there was a question.
I WENT INTO the kitchen to brew more caffeine and hunt for bread, and
found Crezia juicing ploins and mountain tarberries in a chrome press. Her
hair was loose and she was wearing a short, cream silk houserobe.
‘Oh!’ she said as I walked in.
‘I’m sorry,’ I said, retreating.
‘Oh, don’t bother, Gregor. You’ve seen me in a lot less.’
‘Yes, I have.’
‘Yes, you have. Fruit juice?’
‘I was looking for caffeine, actually.’
‘How could I forget? Breakfasts on the terrace... me with my fruit and
grain-cakes, you with your caffeine and eggs and salt-pork.’
I filled a pan from the sink pump and lit the stove. Then I rinsed out the
pot. ‘I suppose now’s your opportunity to tell me “I told you so”,’ I said.
‘What do you mean?’
‘You always said fruit and grain-loaf was the path to a healthy life,
remember? You used to go on about diet and fibre and all sorts. Told me my
intake of caffeine and alcohol and red meat would kill me.’
‘I take it back.’
‘Really?’
‘It won’t be your diet that kills you, Gregor,’ she said, suddenly biting at
a fingernail.
‘You were right, of course. Look at you.’
‘I’d rather not,’ she said, crushing a ploin with excessive force.
‘You’re as lovely as the day I first met you.’
‘The day you first met me, Gregor Eisenhorn, you were half-comatose
with anaesthetic and I was wearing a scrub mask.’
‘Ah. How could I forget?’
She looked at me witheringly.
‘Still,’ I said. ‘I’m not lying. I treated you badly. I’m still treating you
badly. Someone like you doesn’t deserve that.’
She tasted her pulpy juice drink. ‘I won’t argue with any of that. But...
it’s nice to hear you admit it.’
‘It’s the truth. So’s the fact you’re still lovely.’
She sighed. ‘Juvenat programs are all easy to administer. I look this way
thanks to Imperial science, not fruit juice.’
‘I still believe in fruit juice.’
She grinned. ‘You don’t look so bad yourself, red meat and caffeine
considered.’
The pan began to boil. ‘I feel about a thousand years old next to you. Life
has not treated me kindly.’
‘Oh, I don’t know. There’s a nobility about your scars. Something very
masculine about the way you wear your age well.’
I started to look in cupboards for the ground beans.
‘That canister there,’ she said. ‘The chicory blend you always used. I’ve
never lost the taste for it.’
I took the tin canister and spooned out several measures into the pot.
‘Crezia,’ I said, ‘you should have let go of me a long time ago. I was never
any good for you. I was never any good for anyone, truth be told.’
‘I know,’ she said. ‘But I can’t. That’s just the way of things.’
I poured the boiling water into the pot and let it stand.
‘How’s Alizebeth?’ she asked suddenly.
I had been sort of waiting for that. I had broken my long relationship with
Crezia Berschilde in the end because of Bequin. Even though I knew
Alizebeth and I could never be together in any way except friends, I knew I
would never get past my love for her. It was too much in the way, and that
could never be fair on Crezia.
Twenty-five years before, in that very house, I had told her as much. And
walked away.
‘She’s dying,’ I said.
Crezia put her glass down suddenly. ‘Dying?’
‘Or already dead,’ I told her what had happened on Durer.
‘Oh, God-Emperor,’ she said. ‘You should go to her.’
‘What could I do?’
‘Be there,’ she said firmly. ‘Be there and tell her before it’s too late.’
‘How do you know I haven’t already told her?’
‘Because I know you, Gregor. Too well.’
‘I... well...’
‘The two of you never... I mean?’
‘No. She’s an untouchable. I’m a psyker. That’s the way it works.’
‘And you never told her?’
‘She knows.’
‘Of course she knows! But you never told her?’
‘No.’
She embraced me. I pulled her close. I thought of all the things I had
never done, or never started, or never finished. Then I remembered all the
things I had done and could never undo.
‘The last thing you want is me, Crezia,’ I whispered into her hair.
‘I’ll be the judge of that.’
The kitchen door burst open and Aemos limped in. Crezia and I let each
other go.
We could have been doing anything for all Aemos cared. ‘You have to
come and hear this, Gregor,’ he said.
HE HAD BEEN listening to the Sub-sector Service on the vox, news from
all around the Helican sub, some of it days or weeks old. By the time we
were standing around the old set, the news had moved on to stock reports
and shipping forecasts.
‘Well?’ I asked.
‘A report from Messina, Gregor. The upper levels of spire eleven of
Messina Prime were destroyed twenty-four hours ago by what was cited as
a recidivist blast.’
I went cold. Spire eleven, Messina Prime. That was the location of the
residence I had leased for the use of the Distaff. Nayl and Begundi had
taken Alizebeth and Kara there. For safety.
‘The report said that over ten thousand lives had been lost,’ Aemos
murmured. ‘The Messina arbites are hunting for suspects, but it’s been
attributed to a radical free Messina outfit.’
I sat down, trembling. Crezia crouched beside me, hugging me. The
Distaff... gone? Bequin... Nayl... Kara Swole... Begundi?
It was too much.
I realised why Khanjar the Sharp had hired so many Vessorine
janissaries. Multiple strikes, multiple worlds. What else had this Khanjar
hit? What other pain had he already caused me?
Who else had he killed?
‘What’s going on?’ Eleena asked, coming in, rubbing her sleepy eyes.
I PACED THE house and the courtyard garden. Two or three times, I started
up towards the box room, the autopistol in my hand. Damn the bond! I
would have vengeance!
Each time, I turned back. I’d counselled Medea against vengeance, and
so I should listen to my own good advice. Killing Tarl would be like
breaking a sword. What was it Medea had said? It’s a displacement activity.
It’s something you can lock on to and do because you can’t do the thing you
really want to do. I needed something, and it wasn’t payback.
So what was it? I needed to get back in the game. I needed to round up
my allies. I needed to discover who Khanjar the Sharp was.
And then, damn the advice I had given Medea, I needed to destroy him.
AT NINE SHARP, Adept Cielo arrived with his clerk, having been
summoned the day before. Both were hooded and cloaked, which I suppose
was their idea of subtlety.
I met with them in the drawing room, with Crezia in attendance. She had
dressed in a trouser suit of beige murray.
Adept Cielo was an elderly, experienced astropath, one of the best the
Guild House in Ravello had to offer.
‘I take it, sir, this is a private matter?’
‘It is.’
‘Are you purchasing my services in cash?’
‘No, adept, by direct fund transfer. I have a confidential message service
which I wish to use. I expect the utmost discretion.’
‘You have the guarantee of the Guild, sir,’ said Cielo. His clerk opened a
data-slate and offered me the thumb-print scanner.
I pressed my thumb against it and then entered my code.
‘Ah,’ said Cielo, as the slate chimed and displayed a readout. ‘That’s all
sorted out. Your accounts have released the funds. Everything’s in order, Mr
Eising. Let us proceed.’
OF COURSE, I wasn’t using any accounts that were connected with the
person of Gregor Eisenhorn. I had good reason to suspect my finances were
under observation, if not frozen. But I wasn’t even going to try, because that
would let my enemy know that someone with the authority to access Gregor
Eisenhorn’s accounts was still alive, and it would be comparatively simple
to trace that access.
As with the various properties I owned, I had resources under other
identities. ‘Gorton Eising’ had several holdings with the Imperial Thracian
treasury, with enough funds for my current needs.
I had set up the confidential message service many years before so that I
could send and receive messages without using my real identity. It was
essentially an automatically maintained mailbox account that I could
access, using an astropath, from any location. I could send messages
through it, and read any communiqués that had been posted to it. The
service was registered under the name ‘Aegis’.
When Cielo accessed the Aegis account, there were no communiqués
waiting to be read. Composing the contents in Glossia, I had Cielo send
warning messages to Fischig on Durer, to Messina, to agents of my
organisation on Thracian Primaris, Hespems, Sarum and Cartol. I used the
signature ‘Rosethorn’. I also sent a private, coded, anonymous transmission
to a friend outside the Helican sub-sector. It was a single word message that
read ‘Sanctum’.
I would wait for responses before I contacted my Lord Rorken. I wanted
to take things one step at a time. Not for the first time in my career, I
wanted to stay out of sight, except to friends.
Of course, even sending communiqués in another name was risky. Many
or all of the people I was trying to contact might be under surveillance
themselves – if they hadn’t already been eliminated. But Glossia was a
private code. Even if my messages were intercepted, they would be
impossible to decipher.
THE FIRST RESPONSES arrived by noon the next day. Cielo’s clerk came up
from the Guild House to deliver them.
One was a message from Fischig, in Glossia, that essentially told me he
was already en route from Durer and would arrive at Gudrun in about
twenty days. I dispatched a reply that emphasised caution and told him to
contact me when he was close.
The message ‘Sanctum’ had been answered with the words ‘Sanctum
arising, in fifteen’. There was no ident on the communiqué, and the source
was deep space.
The clerk then passed me a data-slate. ‘The communiqués to Messina,
Thracian Primaris, Hesperus and Cartol have all been returned as
undeliverable. That is strange. The message from Hesperus has a statement
from the local arbites attached, recommending you get in touch with them
directly. There has been no response from Sarum.’
After the clerk had left, I discussed it with Aemos. He was as alarmed as
I was. ‘Undeliverable? Most perturbatory. And the interest of the arbites is
disturbing.’
‘What progress with the names?’ I asked. He had been at work on
Crezia’s codifier all morning.
‘Nothing. No listing for a Maria Tarray and nothing on any Khanjar the
Sharp. A khanjar is a blade weapon, of course. A curved dagger from
ancient Terra. The word is occurs in several Imperium cultures.’
‘Can you resource further?’
‘Not using this machine. But your doctor friend is going to walk me to
the universitariate this afternoon and get me access to their main data
engines.’
HE WAS GONE for hours, until late in the evening. Crezia had teaching
duties to perform, and Phabes was all but invisible. I was left alone with
Eleena.
I checked the prisoner. He was awake but unresponsive. Crezia had left
him a tray of food and some water before leaving, but it was untouched. I
tried a few questions but he didn’t stir. He was zoned out in a post-
interrogation stupor.
Medea was still sleeping, but her life signs was good and there was no
trace of post-operative infection. I kissed her forehead gently and went back
to the kitchen.
Eleena was seated at the refectory table, one third down a bottle of fine
Hesperean claret. Without asking, she fetched me a glass and poured me
some.
I sat down with her. The kitchen doors were open, affording us a cool
evening breeze and a fine view out over the courtyard to the Itervalle. The
mountain was ochre in the setting sun, and even as we watched it gently
shifted colour, becoming russet, then almost scarlet, then ultramarine.
‘Have you eaten?’ Eleena asked.
‘No. Have you?’
‘I’m not very hungry,’ she replied, and drank a mouthful of wine.
‘I’m sorry, Eleena,’ I said.
‘Sorry, sir? Why?’
‘Sorry that you should be in the middle of all this. It’s an unpleasant
business and costing us all dear.’
She smiled. ‘You got me out of Spaeton alive, sir. For that I’m thankful.’
‘I only wish I could have got everyone out alive.’
She shrugged. I could tell she was haunted by the killing she had seen.
Sastre’s brave sacrifice in particular had scarred her. Eleena Koi was only
about twenty-five, just a girl, and a new recruit to the Distaff. She’d not
seen any active service in the field yet. She’d been posted to Spaeton as
resident untouchable – something the Distaff regarded as an easy job – to
get her acclimatised to the work. Some acclimatisation.
‘If you’d like to leave, I think that would be all right. I could arrange
some adequate papers, some money. You could get off-world, to safety.’
Eleena looked almost offended. ‘I am a contracted untouchable in the pay
of the Distaff, sir. Perhaps, Emperor bless me, the last one alive. I knew
service to an inquisitor would be dangerous when I started. I’m under no
illusions.’
‘Even so—’
‘No, sir. I’m strong enough for this. It may be extreme, but it’s what I
was hired to do. Besides...’
‘Besides what?’
‘Well, for one thing, we know that the enemy has at least one powerful
psyker in his pay. That means you’ll need an untouchable.’
‘True.’
‘And... I think I’d feel safer sticking with you, sir. If I went off on my
own, I’d be looking over my shoulder for the rest of my life.’
‘Thank you, Eleena. You could stop calling me “sir” now, though. If what
we’ve been through these last few days can’t be counted as a bonding
process, I don’t know what can.’
‘Right,’ she smiled. It was a change to see a smile on her face. She was
tall and overly thin, in my opinion, always seeming edgy and nervous. The
smile suited her.
Neither of us said anything for a few moments.
‘So, what should I call you?’ she asked eventually.
We chatted idly for a while longer, until the Itervalle had become black
and the sky Imperial blue. The stars were out.
‘Do we have a plan?’ she asked.
‘Theoretically, we find out who is set so murderously against us and hunt
him down. Practically, that means staying here, out of sight, for a while at
least, then getting off planet.’
‘How long for that, do you think?’
‘My preferred means of planet exit will be available in fifteen days.’
She refilled our glasses. ‘I like that. I like it when you sound like
everything’s under control.’
‘So do I,’ I chuckled.
‘So... once we’re off-planet, what then? Practically speaking?’
‘It depends on a few things. What we manage to turn up in the next two
weeks. Whether I dare correspond with the ordos.’
‘You don’t think the Inquisition is involved, do you?’
‘Not at all,’ I replied. It wasn’t a lie, because I was sure we weren’t in
conflict with any external agency, but it wasn’t entirely the truth either. I
had been in the job long enough to know that nothing is out of the question.
But there was no point alarming her. ‘It’s simply that I think our enemy is
so well co-ordinated, so well provided, that he’s watching everything. If I
contact the Inquisition, it could betray us.’
I took up my glass and drank a good measure of the fine red wine. ‘So, if
nothing turns up, when we leave here... it’s open. There are places we could
run to find security, friends I could call upon. Our best bet might be to
disappear and stay hidden until our plans are formalised. But I’m torn. I’d
like to head to Messina. If there’s a chance any of them are alive...’
Apart from roaming field agents engaged on diverse tasks, the Distaff
headquarters on Messina represented my only other base of operations. If it
was gone, and Spaeton House too, I was cut adrift.
‘I had many friends at the Distaff Hall. I hope they’re all right,’ She
looked at the table and fiddled with her glass. ‘I suppose you’re most
concerned about Madam Bequin.’
‘Well—’ I began.
‘She being such an old friend and colleague of yours, I mean. And that
she was badly hurt on Durer. And everyone knows...’ She stopped suddenly.
‘Knows what, Eleena?’
‘Well, that you love her.’
‘Everyone knows, do they?’
‘You can’t hide something like that. I’ve seen you together. You adore
each other.’
‘But—’
‘You’re a psyker and she’s one of us. I know, I know. That doesn’t mean
you don’t love her, all the same.’
She looked at me and blushed. ‘This wine!’ she said. ‘I’ve said far too
much, haven’t I?’
‘No, Eleena,’ said Crezia. Neither of us had heard her come in. ‘Talk
some sense into him, will you? He has to go back and see her. It’s the right
thing.’
Crezia was dressed in her formal tutorial robes. She took a glass from the
rack, came to the table and, finding the bottle was empty, set about opening
another.
‘How was your day?’ I asked, trying to change the subject.
‘I spent four hours lecturing the sophomore class on the principles of
thoracic palpation. I’ve never seen such a crowd of ill-prepared dolts. When
I got one fellow up for a practical, he took hold of the volunteer subject’s
thigh. How do you think my day was?’
She sat down with us at the table. ‘I looked in on our guest. I’m
concerned about his condition. He hasn’t taken any food or drink, and he’s
only marginally responsive. I think you may have damaged him with your
mental probings.’
‘Either that,’ I said, ‘or he’s having an adverse reaction to the drugs.’
‘Possibly. If he’s the same in the morning, I’ll run some bloodwork on
him. Whatever, he’s not well and he’s not comfortable. There’s severe
lividity in his hands and feet. You tied those bonds so damn tight.’
‘As tight as they needed to be, Crezia. He’s a Vessorine janissary paid to
murder me, don’t forget.’
‘Shut up and pour me a drink.’
THE MOMENT AEMOS came in, past ten o’clock, I could tell something was
wrong. He was carrying a small pile of data-slates and accepted a drink
from Eleena without question, which was unusual for him.
His hand was trembling as he raised the glass to sip. Even Crezia could
see this was not like him.
‘Well, old friend?’ I asked.
‘I spent hours resourcing those names, Gregor. Still nothing on this
Khanjar, though I assembled a list of planets that still use the word.’ He slid
a slate across to me.
‘Maria Tarray... a little more success there. A Maria Tari was arrested by
the arbites on Hallowcan five years ago for participating in cult activity. She
was pending trial when she escaped custody. She turned up twice more: on
Felthon, where she was a known associate of the cult leader, Berrikin
Paswold; and on Sanseeta, where she was wanted in connection with the
murder of Hierarch Sansum and five Ministorum clerics. The Inquisition
also has a warrant out for her restraint as a suspected rogue psyker.’
‘So, an active participant in cult activity, then?’ I looked at the extracts
Aemos had put on a slate. They didn’t tell me much more. If I contacted the
Inquisition, they’d have a more complete file. Despite the risks, I felt
inclined to get in touch with Rorken.
‘If it’s the same woman,’ he replied.
There was no picture, but the physical description matched my mind’s
retrieved image.
‘What’s her background?’
‘There’s nothing on that... except that when questioned during her
detention on Hallowcan, she claimed to be thirty-seven and stated her birth
world was Gudrun.’
‘Interesting...’ I said. ‘We should check her details against the planetary
census and—’
‘I believe you pay me to be thorough, Gregor,’ said Aemos, churlishly.
‘I’ve already done that. There is no record of her here. In fact, there is no
one on Gudrun with the surname Tarray or Tari. The surname does,
however, occur on other worlds. Too many, in fact, to be of any help.’
‘So, savant,’ said Crezia, ‘what’s really troubling you?’
Aemos took another glug of wine and pushed a slate into the centre of the
table. ‘I was running out of options with the names, so I turned to
something else. I inspected the news registers from across the sub-sector,
hunting for key words. You won’t like it.’
I READ DOWN the slate, my heart turning to cold stone. It showed me
bulletin reports of incidents from several planets in the sub. Just little items,
most of which wouldn’t even have made column space beyond the regional
news wires. Certainly, the events reported wouldn’t have been planetary
news, and definitely not interplanetary. Aemos had only found them
because he had been specifically looking, and trawling the Imperium’s news
wire data compendium.
The first report was of the explosion on Messina. Messina Prime, the
main hive, spire eleven. The blast had occurred at ten fifty, local. That was
chilling. By my estimation, the raid on Spaeton had commenced at precisely
the same time, given sidereal adjustments. The explosion had incinerated
the uppermost ten levels of the spire. The death toll was put at eleven
thousand six hundred. The Lord Governor had declared a state of
emergency.
There was a long appended list of properties and business destroyed.
Amongst them halfway down the second page, was the Thorn Institute, the
name by which the Distaff had been publically known.
No survivors. I supposed it could have been a coincidence, but I didn’t
believe in them. Which meant that my foe, this Khanjar the Sharp, had not
hesitated to exterminate thousands of civilians just to take out the Distaff.
The news file stated that a proscribed movement calling itself the Scions
of Messina had claimed responsibility. That group, it said, struck for
Messina’s independence from the Imperium.
Which was frankly rubbish. Messina was as Imperial as a planet-culture
got.
The second report listed on the slate was filed from Cartol. A family
touring Kona Province on vacation had been found murdered by unknown
gunmen. Two men and three women. Identities were to follow as soon as
they had been established. Authorities on Cartol estimated the time of death
at between ten and midnight, two days back.
I had sent my agent Leres Phinton, along with Biron Fakal, Loys Naran
and two untouchables, to Cartol five months earlier, to gather evidence
concerning a death cult in the Kona region. They had reported back
regularly. Dear God-Emperor...
I scrolled to the next item. From Thracian Primaris. A private residence
in Hive Sixty-Two had been firebombed just before midnight. Eight dead,
unidentified. The location was listed as Sixty-two, Up-Hive, level 114,871...
which was the address of the subsidiary office I maintained on the capital
world of the Helican sub-sector. Barned Ferrikal, who had been with me for
thirty years, ran that place with a staff of seven.
The next. Hesperus. Two men killed in a firefight with juve-gangs. Just
before midnight a week ago. They had wandered into the wrong part of
town, an arbites spokeman said.
Lutor Witte and Gan Blaek, two of the most capable undercover agents I
ran, had been operating on Hesperus for a year, seeking to uncover a
Tzeentchian cult that was preying on the juve population of the under-hives.
Next, Sarum, capital world of the Antimar sub. One of my most
promising pupils, Interrogator Devra Shiborr, had gone there under my
instruction eight months prior to infiltrate and expose a chaotifiliac ring in
the central university. She had posed as Doctor Zeyza Bajj, a historian from
Punzel.
The news item recorded the death, apparently by suicide, of the
promising academic Bajj. Her body, dead for about eight hours, had been
discovered in her bathroom at choir bell this same morning.
And then the last, the most shocking. From the Sameter Global News
Wire, posted a week ago. The residential home of Inquisitor Nathun
Inshabel had been attacked by an unidentified enemy and obliterated.
Inshabel was listed amongst the dead.
I SAT BACK. They were all looking at me. Aemos was leaning his chin on
his hands and the two women were staring with anxious patience.
‘They’re all dead,’ I said. ‘Everyone. Every thread of my staff operation.
My home here, the Distaff headquarters, and all the agents I had on active
work in the field. Every one, everything. All hit at effectively the same hour
on the same day of the week.’
My voice tailed off. I was too deeply shocked. Crezia poured me a glass
of amasec and took one herself.
All of it, gone. The operation I had spent decades building up, the friends
and allies I had drawn together... destroyed in one night. All my visible
resources had been identified, targeted and eliminated. Apart from dear
Fischig, slogging his way back to meet us, we were all that was left.
I felt disconnected more than anything else. The network of intelligence
and active personnel I had built up since the start of my career had been
brutally taken from me.
I was alone.
I wanted nothing... nothing more than to see this Khanjar the Sharp face
to face and make a reckoning.
I WENT TO bed, the amasec untouched, and slept fitfully. In the small
hours, I woke painfully from a dream I couldn’t quite remember at first. As
I lay in the darkness, the details slowly returned to me. I had been dreaming
about the escape from Spaeton. Medea and Jekud Vance had been calling
out to me, begging to be rescued. I remembered the sensation of taking
Medea’s hand, and clutching out at Vance, who couldn’t quite reach me.
The janissaries shot him down, cutting his body apart with las-fire. His
psychic death scream had cut into my mind like a hot wire, and that’s what
had woken me. Hadn’t it?
I WOKE AGAIN at four. The night was quiet except for the click of the
mountain crickets.
Something was wrong. I got up, slid the autopistol out from under the
mattress and crept out into the landing.
I could hear Aemos snoring in his room, and the distant sighs of Crezia in
slumber.
Eleena’s door was open.
I looked in. The bed was empty and the quilt cast off onto the floor.
I edged down the corridor with my back to the wall and my weapon
raised in both hands, almost as if I was praying. There was a light shafting
out from under the next door. The bathroom.
I heard water gurgle and light suddenly flooded me as the door opened.
I aimed the gun.
‘Oh god! Golden Throne, sir! What the hell are you d—’
I slapped my hand across Eleena’s startled mouth and pulled her into the
shadows.
‘You scared the hell out of me,’ she whispered once I relaxed my grip.
‘Sorry.’
‘I was just going to the bathroom.’
‘Sorry. Something’s wrong.’
‘Gregor? What’s the noise?’ Crezia’s voice floated down the landing.
‘Get back in your room!’ I hissed.
In a typically Crezia Berschilde manner, she did the opposite. She was
pulling on her silk robe as she padded down to join us.
‘What is damn well doing on?’
‘For once, just shut up, Crezia,’ I snapped.
‘Well, excuse me all to hell.’
I pushed them both behind me and crept down towards the door of the
box room.
‘Nice rump,’ said Crezia. I was only wearing a wrap.
‘Will you be serious just for a minute?’ I snarled back.
‘Please, doctor,’ urged Eleena. ‘This is serious.’
The box room door was shut and dark.
‘See?’ said Crezia. ‘No problem.’
I felt the doorknob and realised it was loose. Crezia jumped as I kicked
the door in, and aimed my gun at the bed.
The empty bed.
Eleena turned on the light. The wispy, fraying strands of Tarl’s bindings
were still tied to the bedstead. He’d bitten through them or tugged them off.
‘Golden Throne, he’s gone!’
‘Oh no...’ Crezia murmured. ‘I only loosened his bonds a little.’
‘You did what?’
‘I told you! I told you I was worried about the constriction. The lividity
in his hands and his—’
‘You didn’t tell me you’d slackened them off!’ I raged.
‘I thought you’d understood what I meant!’
I ran downstairs. The unlit hall was pale with moonlight that slanted in
through the half-open front doors.
‘He can’t have gone far! What does it matter any way?’ Crezia called
after me.
I stepped out into the street. There was no sign of any one or anything.
The cool shadows of the night spread fluidly across the flagstones.
Tarl, I was sure, was long gone.
I went back inside and Crezia turned on the hall lights.
And screamed.
Phabes was bent over in the corner, like a man who has fallen asleep
sitting up. But he was very dead. His throat had been slashed. A wide pool
of blood was leaking outwards slowly from his hunched form.
‘Do you see now, Crezia? Do you?’ I yelled up at her.
Tarl was loose. He knew who I was and where I was. We had to leave.
Fast.
TWELVE
Into the night, into the mountains.
The Trans-Atenate Express.
A prompt from the dead.
‘NO,’ SAID CREZIA. ‘No. No way. No.’
‘This isn’t up for debate, Crezia. It’s not a suggestion, it’s a... an
instruction.’
‘How dare you order me around like one of your staff lackeys, Eisenhorn.
I am not leaving!’
I opened my mouth, then closed it again. The brutal murder of her man
Phabes was causing her great distress. Getting through to her would be
hard.
I turned to Aemos and Eleena. ‘Get dressed. Collect up everything and
stow it in the flier. I want to be away from here in under half an hour.’ They
both hurried away.
It was difficult to know how long the janissary had been gone. Phabes,
whose body Aemos had covered with a sheet, was still quite warm, so I
reckoned Tarl only had an hour’s head start, ninety minutes worst case.
Given his Vessorine pragmatism, I figured he had headed straight for a vox-
station to report our location to his brethren. That’s what I’d have done in
his position. He could have tried to kill me himself, but by then he knew not
to underestimate my abilities. There was a decent chance I’d have taken
him down, in which case the secret of my location would never have got
out.
No, he’d gone to find means of sending the message. It was impossible to
know how close elements of his party were, but if we were still here in sixty
minutes’ time, I didn’t much rate our chances.
It also occurred to me that once he’d got his message off safely, he’d be
clear to come back and have a try at me himself.
I took Crezia by the hand and led her back upstairs. Her eyes were puffy
and red, and she was a little vacant with shock. She sat on the end of my
bed as I got dressed.
‘If I could just go, Crezia, I would,’ I said softly, finding a fresh shirt. ‘If
it was just a matter of walking away and removing all my crap from your
life, that’s what I’d do. But that’s not what’s going to happen. Mercenaries
will be heading this way. They will be arriving soon, probably before dawn.
They will question and kill anyone they find. You won’t be able to tell them
you don’t know where I’ve gone. They will... well, they’re Vessorine
janissaries and they’re being paid well. I can’t leave you here.’
‘I don’t want to go. This is my home, Gregor. My damn home, and look
what you’ve done.’
‘I’m sorry.’
‘Look what you’ve damn well done to my life!’
‘I’m sorry. I’ll make amends.’
She got up, the anger coming back and eclipsing her sorrow. ‘How? How
the hell can you make up for this? How the hell can you make up for all the
pain you’ve ever caused me?’
‘I have no idea. But I will. And you have to stay alive so I can. I’ve got
the ruination of your nice comfortable existence on my conscience, Crezia.
I will not add your death to that.’
‘Fine words. I’m not coming. I’m going back to bed.’
I grabbed her by the arm and stopped her. I had to find a different tack.
As a medic, she was almost professionally selfless. Appealing to her sense
of self preservation was futile.
‘I need you to come. That’s the truth of it. I’ve got to take Medea with
me. I can’t leave her here, and I don’t think she’s in a position to travel.’
‘Of course she isn’t!’
‘So she’ll die?’
‘If you move her now? In her state?’
‘Better she travelled with a doctor then, don’t you think?’
She shook off my hand. ‘I will not allow you to jeopardise the health of
my patient, Eisenhorn,’ she warned.
‘Then consider the prognosis, doctor. If she stays here, she’ll be dead by
morning. They will kill her when they find her. If she comes with me
without you, she’ll likely die too. I think what’s really in question here is
your medicae oath to preserve life.’
I hated being so manipulative... well, with her anyway. She regarded me
with venom, knowing that I’d cornered her.
‘You bastard. You clever, clever bastard. I don’t know why I ever loved
you.’
‘I don’t know why either. But I know why I loved you. You always cared.
You always did the right thing.’
She turned and walked out of my room.
I finished dressing, and tucked spare clothes and Barbarisater into a
leather grip I found on top of the wardrobe. Then I picked up the rune staff
and—
—stopped in the doorway.
The Malus Codicium was still in the drawer of the nightstand. I wrapped
it in a pillow case and tucked it into the grip. How could I have nearly
forgotten it?
The first answer that occurred to me was strange and unnerving. Perhaps
it wanted to be forgotten.
THE FLIER’S INTERIOR lights illuminated a patch of the little courtyard.
Aemos and Eleena had stowed everything – clothes for each of them, and
the manuscripts and books we had rescued from Spaeton House. I put my
own stuff aboard and ran a pre-flight. The flier was charged to optimum.
‘Help me, damn you all!’ Crezia said.
She was dressed in a dark green utility suit and a quilted coat, and had
two travel bags with her. Medea lay on a grav-gurney, strapped in place
with a resuscitrex unit and a narthecium full of supplies magnetically
anchored to the underside of the gurney. Crezia had slaved two med-skulls
to our patient, and they hovered in the air behind the stretcher.
We got Medea aboard and then clambered in ourselves. Crezia sat beside
Medea, saying nothing. She didn’t even look back at the house as we rose
into the night and powered away.
WE FLEW SOUTH, towards the main Atenate range, a massif of gigantic
peaks that split the centre of the continent for three and a half thousand
kilometres. The Itervalle and its neighbours were just foothills compared to
this great geological structure.
I didn’t want to stay in the air for too long. Tarl knew we had a flier and
would have informed his comrades. This was just a short hop to get us
going. I studied a chart-slate and began to compose a route.
BY DAWN, WE were about ninety kilometres to the south-west and several
hundred metres higher, in the base valleys of the ragged-edged Esembo. It
was a soaring black shape in the early light, with a glinting wig of ice. Its
mighty neighbours lurked behind it.
We set down at a town called Tiroyere, a small place that thrived as a
logging centre and a waystation for travellers heading to the resorts at the
top of the Esembo Pass. I parked the flier on the edge of the town under a
brake of firs that would shield it from aerial observers.
No one had said much. The air was briskly cold and I turned the cabin
heater to maximum for Medea’s benefit.
‘We should eat,’ Eleena said. ‘I’d go and get something... but...’
None of us had any money.
Crezia pulled off her gloves and produced a wallet from her coat. ‘Am I
the only person who thinks practically?’ she commented sourly.
Eleena took a credit bar from Crezia and walked down through the trees
into the town. She came back fifteen minutes later carrying a styrene box in
which were four tall, sweet caffeits in disposable flasks, hot pastries in
waxed paper wraps, a loaf stick and some vacuum-sealed sausage meats.
She’d also bought a mini data-slate loaded with a touring guide of the
region. ‘I thought it might be useful,’ she said.
‘Great,’ said Crezia. ‘Now we can pick the best spots to ski.’
While Eleena had been gone, I had spent considerable time and effort
freeing the flier’s side hatch. It had been bolted open in military style for
the permanent gunner position. With the weapon stowed and a fragile
human cargo, I wanted the cabin sealed. It would pull to but the latch
wouldn’t engage. I tried brute force, but I don’t think it had ever been
closed in its entire service life.
We ate and drank in silence, and the med-skulls administered sustenance
for Medea via the fluid drips.
I watched the sky and the long arc of the road into the town. There wasn’t
much traffic. A few utility vehicles and mobile drones, the occasional fast
speeder. All tourists heading for the resorts.
While I ate, I scrolled through the guide Eleena had bought.
WE LEFT TIROYERE at nine thirty, and spent the rest of the day flying
further west, around the shoulders of the Esembo, over the mirrors of the
high lakes and on towards the northern resort of Graj. For a long time, I was
convinced we were being followed by a small, yellow speeder. I became so
concerned that I diverted east, around a tract of mountain pasture and steep
forest.
I lost sight of the yellow craft, but about thirty minutes later picked up a
black one that shadowed us steadily at a distance of five kilometres. My
anxieties returned again.
In the late afternoon, as we flew in towards Graj, the black flier turned
south on a route that would take it to the spa resort of Firiol on the southern
face of Mons Fulco.
I had been jumping at phantoms.
AT GRUJ, I landed the speeder in the cover of some pines south-west of
the old city wall. I took Crezia’s credit bar and walked into the town alone.
Gruj was an old town with a meandering plan like Ravello, but it was far
less picturesque. Slot bars and dance parlours occupied the main
thoroughfares and there was a busy stream of young, vacationing
Gudrunites on every street.
I found the local chambers of the Adeptus Astra Telepathica, a tall, black
windowed structure on the corner of the main square, and went inside.
A careworn female adept called Nicint debited my credit bar and
provided me with access to the Aegis account. I wanted to check if anything
had come in during the last day or so.
I was in for a surprise.
There was a communiqué from Harlon Nayl.
He had survived.
His message was quite long, and written in Glossia. The gist of it was
that he had left Messina two weeks earlier, suspecting, for reasons that he
didn’t go into, that something bad was afoot. That didn’t surprise me. Nayl
had a nose for trouble. That he, of all my poor, lost agents, had been
forewarned of the danger was easy to believe. He was, at the time of
sending, just three days shy of Gudrun.
I had the adept send a reply, also in Glossia, telling Nayl to head for the
southern capital New Gevae and, once there, to arrange passage off planet. I
asked him to confirm and told him I would send again when I was close.
Four days was my estimate. Four days and we would be with Nayl at New
Gevae and heading off-world.
The snow-trak was essentially a luxury recreational vehicle. A well
upholstered cockpit and adjoining cabin housed in a sleek grey hull and
carried on a main track power unit with thick forward wheels for steering.
The rental agent was in full flow, singing the machine’s praises, when I
cut him off.
‘I’ll take it.’
‘A sound choice, sir.’
‘Two weeks’ rental. I’m driving to Ontre, and I’ll be leaving it there.’
‘That’s fine, sir. Deliver it to our offices in Ontre. There’s a little
paperwork to fill out. You have means of identity?’
Crezia’s credit bar soaked up the cost of the deposit. I wanted to keep the
transaction fairly anonymous.
I used the rental agent’s palm reader to rouse another of my slumbering
fake identities. Torin Gregori, a vacationing Thracian businessman with
ample funds. The dealer seemed satisfied.
THE SNOW-TRAK was a hefty brute with a surprising kick in its heels. I
drove it back out of the town towards the flier, stopping on the way to stock
up from a grocery market.
My friends at the flier regarded my approach with caution. I discovered
later that Eleena had had her laspistol drawn and ready.
I leaned out of the cab and waved at them. ‘Get yourselves aboard. We’re
switching vehicles.’
WE LEFT THE empty speeder under the trees, and as soon as Medea was
safely positioned in the plush, leather-padded cabin, I headed out towards
the pass road.
I didn’t tell the others about Nayl. I didn’t want to get their hopes up.
By nightfall, we were powering up the snow-dusted highway over the
pass towards Ontre. Gruj fell away behind us. I thought I saw a small
yellow flier approaching the town as we left, but it was too far away to be
sure.
We drove through the night, taking turns at the wheel. The weather was
clear, and the cockpit vox was tuned to the climate-casts to catch snow
advisories.
Crawling up the northern hem of Mons Fulco, we ran through steady
squalls of snow, and had to drop speed and use the main lamps. Crezia was
driving at that point. She’d lived in the mountains for long enough to know
what to do.
I napped in the cabin, resting out on the long bench seat opposite the still
sleeping Medea. I dreamed about her again, dreamed about saving her.
Jekud Vance was in my dream too, desperate for my help. He screamed,
bawling out a spear of sound and psi-pain that woke me.
I blinked over at Medea, but she was still stable. Eleena was asleep
nearby.
The cabin rocked and vibrated with road noise and snow ghosts fluttered
past the windows.
‘Are you all right, Gregor?’ Aemos asked.
He was sitting on the bench seat at the back of the cabin, surrounded by
data-slates.
‘A dream, that’s all, Uber. It woke me last night too.’
I paused and sat up. The previous night I had assumed I had been woken
by the sounds of Tarl’s escape. But now it had happened again. The dream
had woken me. Woken me both times. Jekud Vance’s terrible death-scream
of pain and rage and frustration.
WE RUMBLED INTO Ontre in mid-afternoon the following afternoon.
Heavy snow had slowed us down, and ice caked the copper roofs of the
famous resort. But heavy snow had also brought the winter sports crowd
into town in great numbers. The place was buzzing with activity, the roads
sluggish with vehicles, the skies flecked with arriving speeders.
I drove the snow-trak into the parking lot of the Ontre Transcontinental
Station, and found a place. Aemos and I went up to the concourse building
where Torin Gregori purchased tickets for three connecting sleep berths.
The express was due in an hour we were told.
Just as the mighty Atenate Range creases the centre of Gudran’s largest
continent, so the Trans-Atenate Express runs like an artery along it. The
railway is famously romantic. Most who ride it do so because of the ride,
vacationers who would rather travel than arrive. The young flock to centres
like Gruj and Ontre to use them as a base for skiing and ice-surfing, but the
wealthy choose the Trans-Atenate, where they can sit in coddled luxury and
watch Gudrun’s most spectacular scenery slip by outside the window.
The great, chrome, promethium-fuelled locomotive pulled into Ontre at
five, pulling a string of ten double-decked carriages. Porters helped us to
manoeuvre Medea aboard.
Our cabins, on the top deck of car three, a wagon-lit, were first class and
spacious. We put Medea in one of them, with Eleena to one side of her and
Crezia to the other. Uber and I shared a fourth. There were communicating
doors between the suites and everything was finished in polished maple.
The express hooted its siren and panted out of Ontre, muscularly taking
the gradient into the Fonette Pass. The huge silvery beast could reach one
hundred and seventy kilometres an hour on flat sections.
I regarded the timetable. Overnight to Fonette, then a short stretch to
Locastre, followed by a high speed, uninterrupted run all the way down
through the Atenate Majors, across the Southern Plateau to the coast.
We would be in New Gevae in just under three days.
THERE WAS BARELY any sense of motion: a slight, rolling vibration that
one swiftly became oblivious to. The cars were robust, thick skinned,
heated and insulated against the Atenate chill, but the side effect of this was
to virtually eliminate exterior sound. The massive engine, deafening from
the vantage of the platform concourse at Ontre, was virtually inaudible.
Only when the express hammered down a cutting or a gorge and the engine
noise was compressed and channelled backwards by the steep sides, did we
catch a whisper of it at all.
With the cabin blind down, I might have been at home in a comfortable
parlour.
While daylight remained, I kept the blind up and was afforded panoramic
views of the pass, the snowfields, pink and soft in the sunset, the hard-
shadowed scarps of rising ice broken at the folds by knuckles of black rock.
Once in a while, beige smoke from the engine streamed past the windows
and obscured the view.
On slow turns, it was possible to lean across to the window port itself and
see the foreshortened flanks of the cars and train ahead, segmented like a
great snake, the chrome and blue-and-white livery catching the last of the
sun. Twice, a long, jumping shadow of the train ran along side us across the
snows.
Night fell and the views outside vanished. I drew the blind. Aemos was
snoozing, so I thought I might walk the length of the train and get to know
the layout.
The communicating door opened and Crezia came in. She was dressed in
a grey satin robe with tightly laced pleating that ran from the high throat
right down to the top of the gathered skirt. A fur wrap was draped over one
arm, and she had put her hair up.
I rose from my seat almost automatically.
‘Well?’ she enquired.
‘You look... stunning.’
‘I meant “well” as in, isn’t it time you escorted me to dinner?’
‘Dinner?’
‘Main meal of the day? Usually found somewhere between lunch and a
nightcap?’
‘I am familiar with the concept.’
‘Good. Shall we?’
‘We are fleeing for our lives. Do you think this is the time?’
‘I can think of no better time. We are fleeing for our lives, Gregor, on the
most exclusive and opulent mode of travel Gudrun has to offer. I suggest we
flee for our lives in style.’
I went into the bathroom and changed into the most presentable clothes I
had with me. Then I linked arms with her and we strolled back along the
companion way to the dining van three cars back.
‘Did you bring these clothes with you?’ I asked quietly as we wandered
down the softly lit, carpeted hallway, encountering other well-dressed
passengers walking to and from the dining van.
‘Of course.’
‘We left in haste, and you packed a gown like that?’
‘I thought I should be ready for anything.’
The dining salon was on the upper deck of the sixth car. Crystal
chandeliers hung from the arched roof, and the roof itself was made of
armourglas. It doubled as an observation lounge, though just then it simply
provided a ceiling of starry blackness.
A string quartet was playing unobtrusively at one end, and the place was
filling up. The air was filled with gentle music, clinking silverware and low
voices. Discrete poison snoopers hovered like fireflies over each place
setting. A uniformed steward showed us to a table by the portside windows.
We studied the menus. I realised how hungry I was.
‘How many times, do you suppose?’ she asked.
‘How many times what?’
‘Years ago, when we were together. You would come to visit me in
Ravello, secretive as is your manner. How many times did I suggest we
took the express through the mountains?’
‘You mentioned it, yes.’
‘We never did, though.’
‘No, we didn’t. I regret that.’
‘So do I. It seems so sad we’re doing it now out of necessity. Although I
might have guessed I’d only get you on a romantic trip like this if you had
to do it.’
‘Whatever the reason, we’re here now.’
‘I should have put a gun to your head years ago.’
We ordered potage velours, followed by sirloin of lowland runka, roulade
with a macedoine of herbs and forest mushrooms affriole, and a Chateau
Xandier from Sameter that I remembered was a favourite of hers.
The soup, served with mouth-watering chapon and a swirl of smitane in
wide-lipped white dishes delicately embossed with the crest of the Trans-
Continental company livery, was velvety and damn near perfect. The runka,
simply pan-seared in amasec, was saignant and irreproachable. The
Xandier, astringent and then musty in its finish, made her smile with fond
memories.
We talked. We had decades to fill in. She told me about her work and her
life, the interest in xeno-anatomy she had developed, the monographs she
had composed, a new procedure for muscle grafting she had pioneered. She
had taken up the spinet, as a means of relaxation, and had now mastered all
but two of Guzella’s Studies. She had written a book, a treatise on the
comparative analysis of skeletal dimorphism in early human biotypes.
‘I almost sent you a copy, but I was afraid how that might be
misconstrued.’
‘I own a first edition,’ I confessed.
‘How loyal! But have you read it?’
‘Twice. Your deconstruction of Terksson’s work on the Dimmamar-A
sites is convincing and quite damning. I might take issue with your chapters
on Tallarnopithicene, but then you and I always did argue over the “Out of
Terra” hypothesis.’
‘Ah yes. You always were a heretic in that regard.’
I felt I had so much less to give back. There was so much about my life
in the last few years I couldn’t or shouldn’t tell her. So I told her about Nayl
instead.
‘This man is trustworthy?’
‘Completely.’
‘And you’re sure it’s him?’
‘Yes. He’s using Glossia. The beauty of that code is that it’s individually
idiomatic. It can’t be broken, used or understood by outsiders. You’d have
to be in my employ for a long time to grasp the fundamentals of its
mechanism.’
‘That bodyguard. The one who betrayed your household.’
‘Kronsky?’
‘Yes. He was in your employ.’
‘Not for long. Even with the basics he’d grasped, he couldn’t dupe me for
long using Glossia.’
‘So we’re going to be rescued?’
‘I’m confident we’ll be able to get off-planet.’
‘Well, Gregor, I think that good news calls for an indulgent dessert.’
The steward brought us ribaude nappe, sticky and sweet, followed by rich
black Hesperine caffeine and digestifs, an oaky amasec for me and a
thimble of pasha for her.
We were laughing together by then.
It was a fine dinner and a good night spent in delightful company. I have
not known its like to this day.
I WAS WOKEN by the jar and a thump of a halt just after dawn. Outside, a
whistle blew, muffled by the car’s hull, and there came the distant mutter of
men’s voices.
Slowly, I slid out of bed, doing my best not to disturb Crezia. She was
still deeply asleep, though she rolled over and reached, murmuring, into the
cooling space I had just vacated.
I tried to find some clothes. They were strewn on the floor, and with the
blind down, it was a matter of touch.
I prised back the edge of the blind with one finger and peeked out. It was
already light, frosty and colourless. There was a station outside, and people
milling on the snowy platform.
We had reached Fonette.
I got dressed, shivering. Now the train was halted and idling, the wall
vents issued a cooler wash of air.
I opened the door and slipped out, casting one last look behind me. In her
sleep, Crezia had curled up into a ball, cocooning herself in the bed-sheets,
shutting out the cold and the world.
OUTSIDE, IT WAS near-freezing and very bright. The wide platform was
busy with passengers leaving or joining the express, and servitor units
conveying pyramids of baggage.
Snow was lightly falling. I hugged myself and stamped my feet. Several
other travellers had got down from the train to stretch their legs.
Fonette station occupied an elevated area above the town, shadowed to
the north by Mons Fulco and to the south by the Uttes, Minor and Major,
and then the weather-veiled bulk of the Central Atens.
‘How long do we stop?’ I asked a passing porter.
‘Twenty minutes, sir,’ he replied. ‘Just long enough for change over and
for the tender to take on water.’
Not long enough to run down into the town, I figured. I stayed on the
platform until the boarding whistle sounded and then stood in the carriage
hallway leaning out of the doorway window as we slowly pulled out of
town.
The station building slid by, revealing a view of the town below that had
not been visible from the platform. Steep roofs iced with snow, a
Ministorum chapel, a sturdy arbites blockhouse. A landing field, just below
the station causeway, filled with berthed and refuelling fliers.
One of them was small and yellow.
I WENT BACK to Crezia’s cabin, took off my coat and boots and lay beside
her until she woke. She rolled over and kissed my mouth.
‘What are you doing?’ she asked, sleepily.
‘Checking the timetable.’
‘I don’t think there are any changes on this line.’
‘No,’ I agreed. ‘We’ll be at Locastre in about four hours. There’s a longer
halt there. Forty-five minutes. Then the long run to New Gevae.’
She sat up, rubbing her eyes. Drowsy, unguarded, she was more beautiful
than ever.
‘So what?’ she asked.
‘I’ll check the astropathic account there. There’ll be time.’
There was a knock at the door. It was the cabin-service steward with a
laden trolley. The last thing we had done the night before was to order a
full, cooked breakfast.
Well, not quite the last thing.
ELEENA AND AEMOS were up, taking breakfast together. Crezia pulled on
her robe and checked on Medea, who was still stable and sleeping deeply.
‘The signs are good,’ she told me on her return. ‘Tomorrow, perhaps the
day after, she should be back with us.’
We ate together in her cabin, picking up our conversations from the night
before. It was all familiar and relaxed, as if we had adjusted our clocks by
twenty-five years. I realised how much I had missed her company and
vitality.
‘What’s the matter?’ she asked. ‘You seem preoccupied.’
I thought about the yellow speeder.
‘Nothing,’ I said.
DURING THE LONG, slow climb up through the Uttes to Locastre, I went
through the data-slates of material Aemos had compiled since the attack on
Spaeton House. I paid particular attention the name Khanjar the Sharp.
Aemos had compiled a list of planet cultures where the word ‘khanjar’ was
still in parlance. Ninety-five hundred worlds, and I went down the list
systematically, even though I knew Aemos, with his greater knowledge of
trivia, had already done so. Any one of them might hold the key. A khanjar
was a ceremonial oathing dagger on Benefax, Luwes and Craiton. It was the
slang term for a gang-lord on distant Mekanique. It was the common word
for a pruning knife on five worlds in the Scarus sector alone. It was a hive-
argot adjective for sharp practice on Morimunda. On three thousand worlds,
it was simply the word for knife.
A knife cutting me to the quick. Who was Khanjar the Sharp? Why was
he diligently seeking my destruction and the destruction of my entire
operation?
I turned to consider the slate listing the injuries he had dealt against me,
the deaths he had, I’m sure, ordered. They were all still shocking to me. The
sheer scope of his murderous efforts astounded me. So many targets, so
many worlds... and all struck at the same sidereal moment.
I found that I kept coming back to the notice of Inshabel’s death. It was,
simply, the odd one out. Every other victim or location target had been a
specific part of my personal organisation. But Nathun Inshabel was not. He
was – had been – an inquisitor in his own right. During my campaign
against the heretic Quixos, almost fifty years earlier, Inshabel, then holding
the rank of interrogator, had been part of my team. He had joined my fold
after the death of his master, Inquisitor Roban, during the atrocity on
Thracian Primaris, and had continued to aid me devotedly until after the
purge of Quixos’s stronghold on Farness Beta. After that, with my
sponsorship, he became an inquisitor and began his own work.
Since then, we had been in contact only a few times and, apart from our
old friendship, there was no connection between us. Why had he been
marked out for destruction too? Coincidence was not a good enough
answer.
What connected us? Who connected us? The obvious name was Quixos,
but that led nowhere. I had eliminated Quixos myself.
I ran through the list of worlds again, trying to discern a link.
One of the planets named on the list was Quenthus Eight.
That name snagged me like a protruding claw. Quenthus Eight. A margin
world. I had never been there. But I’d once been told about it.
Running on instinct, I cross-checked Quenthus Eight with the vast list of
worlds on which Tarray or Tari was a registered surname. Aemos had
already cross-referenced the lists of worlds using ‘khanjar’ with worlds
owning the surname ‘Tarray’, and had come up with seven hundred
possibles. Now I was able to add sense to one of them.
There it was. ‘Khanjar’ was the word for a war knife on Quenthus Eight,
and Tarray was a clan name from that world. Nearly three hundred and fifty
years before, one of the most vile sociopaths in the Imperium had started
his career on Quenthus Eight. Maria Tarray’s reported claims to have been
born on Gudrun had been discounted by Aemos, who had checked the
census and found no sign of the name.
He hadn’t gone back far enough. He hadn’t gone back three and a half
hundred years. I did, and found that Tarry had been a peasant name on
Gudrun until that time. The family tree ended right there.
I knew who it was. I knew who my enemy was.
THIRTEEN
Locastre.
Full stop.
End of the line.
WE ARRIVED AT Locastre over an hour behind schedule. Unseasonal
blizzards had swept up from the east into the Uttes, and the express had
been forced to reduce speed to a crawl. On steep gradients through the
passes, there was a danger of back-slip, and we could feel the frequent jerks
as the car bogies hunted over the ice-caked rails. There was a ten minute
stop on a straight section on the west of Utte Major as the train’s engineer
gangs got out and winched the locomotive’s nose plough into place. The
blizzard was around us then and everything outside the windows was a
colourless swirl.
I went down to the end of the car and peered out through the van
windows. Black blobs were moving in the white haze, some lit by fizzling
flares of green and red. I felt several jolts and metallic clunks shiver
through the deck beneath me.
The intercar tannoy softly informed us that we would be on our way
soon, reassured us that the weather was no hazard, and soothed us with the
news that complimentary hot punch was now being served in the dining
salon. Unnecessarily muffled in furs or expensive mountainwear, other
passengers came to peer out of the mush-flecked ports, grumbling and what
if-ing.
I returned to the cabin I shared with Aemos, locked the doors and sat
down with him. I ran through my theory.
‘Pontius Glaw...’ his old lips spat the name. ‘Pontius Glaw...’
‘It fits, doesn’t it?’
‘From what you tell me, Gregor. Though of course, I know little of what
passed between you and that monster on Cinchare.’
We had first tackled the villainy of Pontius Glaw and his poisonous brood
right there on Gudrun back in 240, an age ago as it seemed. At the time,
Glaw himself, a notorious heretic, had been dead for two centuries, his
obscene activities curtailed by Inquisitor Angevin.
But Glaw’s intellect and engrammed personality had been preserved in a
psi-pathetic crystal by his noble family. We thwarted the attempts of House
Glaw to restore him to corporeal life, and afterwards I had the crystal
placed for safekeeping with my old ally, Magos Geard Bure of the Adeptus
Mechanicus.
A century later, in 340, I had revisited Bure’s remote fastness on the
mining world Cinchare during the Quixos affair, in order to obtain arcane
information concerning daemonhosts from his prisoner. Without Pontius
Glaw’s dark advice, I would never have been able to vanquish Quixos or his
slaved daemons Prophaniti and Cherubael.
But I had been forced to deal with Glaw. Make it worth his while. The
lure I dangled was that in return for his help, I would commission Bure to
manufacture a body for him to inhabit.
And, because I was an honourable man, I kept my word, believing that
even if Glaw was given mobility, he would never escape Geard Bure’s
clutches.
It seemed I had been wrong about that.
During those private interviews on Cinchare, Glaw had confessed to me
the event that had driven him, the accomplished scion of one of Gudrun’s
most respected noble houses, into the worship of the warp.
It had happened on Quenthus Eight in 019. Glaw had been visiting the
Quenthi amphitheatres, purchasing gladiators for his pit-fighting hobby.
Even before his fall, he was a cruel man. He bought one brute, a warrior
from a remote feral world... Borea, I seem to recall. Anxious to please his
new master, the warrior had given Glaw his tore. It was an ancestral relic
from the feral world, and neither the warrior nor Glaw realised it was
tainted with the foulest Chaos. Glaw had put it on and immediately had
fallen into its clutches. That one simple act had sealed his fate and
transformed him into the idolatrous fiend who had plagued the Helican sub-
sector for nearly two decades.
I gave Aemos the gist of this.
‘The matter seems to fit together. You believe, I take it, that Pontius Glaw
has escaped from his prison on Cinchare, built up his forces, and is now
targetting you for revenge?’
‘Revenge? No... well, indirectly, perhaps. He certainly would want to
have his revenge on me, but the scale of his attack, the effort, the
comprehensive scope... every element of my operation, and Inshabel too.’
Aemos shrugged. ‘Inshabel was with us at Cinchare.’
‘That’s my point. Pontius is trying to destroy everyone who might know
he exists. Most of the Imperium believes he is long dead. We pose a threat
to him just by knowing about him.’
I could tell Aemos had something on his mind that he didn’t want to say.
‘Aemos?’
‘Nothing, Gregor.’
‘Old friend?’
He shook his head.
‘Say it. Pontius Glaw’s existence is only a secret because I never
informed the ordos that he was still sentient. Because I never delivered his
engram sphere into the custody of the Ordo Hereticus as I should have. And
he’s only free now because I had a body built for him.’
‘No.’ He got to his feet and squinted out of the car window, trying to see
something, anything, in the blizzard. ‘We’ve had this conversation before,
or at least one like it. About Cherubael.’
He turned to look at me. He was so very old. ‘You are an inquisitor of the
Glorious Imperium of Mankind. You are dedicated to the destruction of evil
in any facet of its three classic forms: Xenos, Malleus, Hereticus. You face
unimaginable hazards. Yours is the most arduous task undertaken by any
Imperial servant. You must use every weapon at your disposal to protect our
culture. Even the arsenal of the enemy. And you know full well that
sometimes such uses have consequences. We may now regret your actions
with Pontius Glaw, but without those, Quixos would not have been brought
down. We can play the “if only” game all day. The simple truth is that
victory comes at a price, and we are paying that price now. The true
measure of your character is what you do about it.’
‘I correct my mistakes. I bring down Pontius Glaw.’
‘I have no doubt of that.’
‘Thank you, Aemos.’
He sat down again. ‘This Tarray woman. How does she fit in?’
I showed him the census record. ‘The Tarrays were a low caste family on
Gudrun during Glaw’s organic lifetime. Then the line stops abruptly, but
reappears on Quenthus. I think the Tarrays, or at least a Tarray, was
amongst Glaw’s retinue, and he took them to Quenthus. I need you to look
into that at Locastre.’
‘Locastre? But we’re only going to be stopping there for forty-five
minutes.’
I gestured to the window. ‘It’ll probably be longer given the weather, but
you’ll have to move fast. I’m going to use the time to access the Aegis
account.’
The handle of the locked connecting door ratcheted back and forth.
‘Gregor?’ It was Crezia.
‘What are you doing locked in there?’ she called through the door.
‘Just discussing things with Aemos.’
‘They’re serving hot punch in the salon. I thought we might mingle.’
‘In a minute,’ I called out in reply. There was a lurch and the train started
to move again.
I looked at Aemos. ‘The things we’ve spoken about... they don’t go any
further. Not yet. Crezia doesn’t need to know, neither does Eleena, come to
that.’
‘My lips are sealed,’ he said.
WE CAME OUT of the blizzard and down a comfortable gradient into
Locastre. It was nearly midday. The bad weather lurked like a grey wall
behind us, veiling the Uttes, but reports suggested it was moving into the
valley.
At Locastre, the porters announced a ninety minute stop.
I told Eleena to make sure the express didn’t leave until Aemos and I
were safely back.
Locastre occupies a cleft valley gouged by glaciers. The old buildings are
dark grey – granite stands in for the traditional Gudrun ouslite used in the
lowlands – and the altitude and climate is such that pressurised, heated
tunnels of armourglas sheath the streets. I hired a servitor litter and had it
scurry me through the warm, damp street tunnels, as ominous squalls of
snow peppered the transparent roof above.
Outside the office of the Astropathic Guild, I told it to wait and left my
credit bar locked into its fare-meter as good faith. It settled low on its
spider-limbed chassis, venting steam from its hydraulics.
There was a message from Nayl waiting for me in the Aegis account. He
had made good time, and was already in New Gevae. Passage off-world had
been arranged with a freighter called the Caucus. He was eager to see me.
Nayl’s communiqué was in Glossia and I phrased my reply the same way.
Weather permitting, we would be in New Gevae in two days. On arrival, I
would arrange a meeting with him.
‘Is that all, sir?’ asked the adept attending me.
I remembered Crezia’s comments over dinner about Nayl being
trustworthy. I added another line, suggesting that the situation reminded me
of the tight spot we’d been in on Eechan, years before, facing Beldame
Sadia.
‘Send it, please,’ I said.
Up at the station, the express sounded its horn.
THE EXPRESS RUMBLED up into the Central Atens, chased by the weather.
Despite the fact that we were now scaling some of the steepest and longest
gradients in the route, the locomotive was running at full power, trying to
outpace the snows for as long as it could.
The main range of the Atens, through which we now travelled, included
the greatest mountains on Gudrun: Scarno, Dorpaline, The Heledgae,
Vesper, Mount Atena. Each one dwarfed the peaks like Mons Fulco that we
had encountered earlier. They seemed as dark and cyclopean as tilted
continents.
They were also beautiful. Peerless tracts of blue-white ice, unblemished
leagues of snow, sharp sunshine that almost twinkled like starlight in a
vacuum.
Until, before nightfall, it all vanished. Freezing fog and vapour
descended like a stage curtain, sealing out the light and dropping visibility
to a few dozen metres. Then snow began to flutter again and our speed
decreased. The weather had caught up with us.
‘GREGOR?’ I HAD been watching the snowstorm. ‘Come in here.’
Crezia beckoned me through the connecting door. Medea was awake.
The cyberskulls hovered back to give me room as I sat down beside her
cot. She looked tired and drawn, faded almost. But her eyes were half open
and she managed a thin smile as she saw me.
‘Everything’s okay. You’re in safe hands.’
Her mouth moved, but no sound came out.
‘Don’t try to speak,’ Crezia whispered.
I saw curiosity in Medea’s eyes as she focused on Crezia.
‘This is Doctor Berschilde. A good friend. She saved your life.’
‘...long...’
‘What?’
‘How long been sleep?’
‘The best part of a week. You were wounded in the back.’
‘Ribs sore.’
‘That will pass,’ said Crezia.
‘They... they get us?’
‘No, they didn’t get us,’ I said. ‘And they’re not going to get us either.’
SHROUDED BY THE bitter blizzards and maintaining no more than sixty
kilometres an hour, we journeyed on across the roof of the world. I ventured
out into the public areas and even to the salon a few times, and found that
diverting entertainments had been laid on: buffet meals, music, card
schools, a regicide tournament, screenings of popular hololithic
extravaganzas. Uniformed Trans-Continental personnel were out in force,
keeping everybody happy and volubly disseminating the notion that being
caught in an Atenate icestorm was all part of the romance of the famous rail
line.
And not a potentially lethal misfortune.
If the locomotive derailed, or the power plant malfunctioned, and the
train became stranded in the midst of a blizzard that lasted more than a
couple of days, we’d freeze to death and they’d have to wait until spring to
dig us out.
Of course, in the nine hundred and ninety years of the Trans-Atenate
Express’s operation, that had never happened. The train had always got
through. It was a remarkably secure form of transport, given the terrain it
crossed.
But there is a first time for anything, as people can be forgiven for
thinking. Years of experience warned the train staff to start reassuring and
distracting the passengers the moment weather closed in, or they’d have a
panic on their hands. The idle rich can be such worriers.
WE CAME TO a halt four times before dawn the next day. The first time
was at about ten in the evening. The tannoy informed us that we were
waiting for wind speeds to ease before crossing the Scarno Gorge Bridge
and that there was no cause for concern. Less than five minutes later, we
were on our way again.
I was still awake at one when we gently coasted to a stop again. I felt
uneasy, and after fifteen minutes, tucked the autopistol into my belt,
strapped Barbarisater to my hip and covered them both with Aemos’s long
green over-robe.
The hallway was dark, the lights dimmed to an auxiliary amber. Little
green cue lights glowed on the staff-only monitor display that was set in the
panelled wall at the end of the car.
I heard someone coming up the spiral stairs from the car’s lower deck
and turned to see a steward who regarded me quizzically.
‘Is everything all right, sir?’ he asked.
‘That was my question. I was wondering why we’d stopped.’
‘It’s just routine, sir. We’re just coming over the Scarno Gradient and the
Master Engineman has ordered a check of the braking elements in case of
excess icing.’
‘I see. Just routine.’
‘Everything’s perfectly safe, sir,’ he said with well-rehearsed assurance.
As if to prove him right, the lights flickered and we were moving again.
He smiled. ‘There we are, sir.’
I went back to my cabin. I barely marked the two further stops we made
that night. But I kept my weapons to hand.
THE SECOND FULL day of travel passed without incident. The weather
alternated between long, furious blizzards and quick, glorious episodes of
sunlit calm. We stopped five more times before supper. Five more routine
hesitations. The tannoy whispered that though we were behind schedule, we
were likely to make up time once we were clear of the mountains and
crossing the Southern Plateau in the latter part of the following day.
I was growing impatient. I found myself pacing the train a lot, end to end.
I even took Crezia to the salon for lunch and stayed long enough to play a
board or two of regicide with her.
Medea was gaining strength. By the afternoon, she was sitting up and
eating for herself. The cyber-skulls disconnected all her drips except the
vital monitor. We took turns to sit with her. I let Eleena tell her the details of
what had happened since the attack on Spaeton House. Medea listened
intently, increasingly dismayed.
When it was my turn to spend an hour at her side, she said, ‘You came
back for me.’
‘Yes.’
‘You might have been killed.’
‘You would have been.’
‘They killed Jekud,’ she said after a pause. ‘We were running across the
paddocks and they cut him down.’
‘I know. I felt it.’
‘I couldn’t help him.’
‘I know.’
‘I felt terrible. After all he had done to show me my father. And I
couldn’t save him.’
‘It was probably quick. The Vessorine are ruthless killers.’
‘I thought I heard him call out, after he had fallen. I was going to turn
back for him, but they were everywhere.’
‘It’s alright.’
She took a beaker from the bedstand and sipped. ‘Eleena says they killed
everyone.’
‘I’m afraid they might have.’
‘I mean, not just here. The Distaff. Nayl. Inshabel.’
I nodded. ‘Someone was very thorough that night. But here’s a thought to
cheer you: Nayl’s alive, and so’s Fischig. We’re going to meet up with both
of them.’
That made her smile. ‘How did Nayl get away?’
‘I don’t know. He hasn’t given me any details. It would seem he got wind
of something and left Messina before the attack. I’m looking forward to
finding out what he knows.’
‘Like who’s behind this, you mean?’
I winked. ‘That, Medea, I already know.’
Her eyes widened. ‘Who?’
‘I’ll tell you when I’ve confirmed my suspicions. I don’t want you
worrying unnecessarily.’
‘Now that’s just cruel,’ she scolded. ‘I won’t be able to think about
anything else now.’
‘Then see what you come up with,’ I suggested. Medea was privy to most
of my operation, and I thought it might be interesting to see if she arrived at
any conclusion herself.
THE JOLT MADE me strike my head against the side panel of the bed and
woke me up in time to feel two more hard judders before the train came to a
complete stop.
It was nearly three in the morning and pitch black. I could hear the ice
flakes pattering like small arms fire off the window of the cabin.
Every halt we had made so far had been smooth and gentle. Not like this.
Aemos had woken too, and sat up as I turned on the sidelight and
strapped on Barbarisater.
‘What is it?’ he asked.
‘Nothing, I hope,’ The inter-cabin door opened and Eleena looked in.
‘Did you feel that?’ she asked sleepily.
‘Find your pistol,’ I told her.
We woke Crezia and got all three of them into Medea’s cabin. Crezia
looked befuddled and worried. Eleena was wide awake by then and
checking the cell of her weapon.
I pulled on Aemos’s over-robe to conceal my own armaments.
‘Stay here and be vigilant,’ I said and then left the connecting suite via
the door to my cabin.
In the gloomy hall, I could hear movement in the other cabins, low voices
and the occasional pip of a summoning alarm as worried passengers tried to
call the stewards.
I went back down the car to the monitor display the moment I saw the
two red lights shining amongst the green ones.
I slid open the display’s glass cover and fitted my signet ring to the
optical reader. The potent Inquisitorial authority codes loaded into my
signet ring rapidly overcame Trans-Continental Line’s confidence software
and gave me access to the express’s master system.
The monitor’s little screen woke up, and flickered with user-friendly
graphics and bars of data. I requested clarification of the red warning lights.
Alert code 88 decimal 508 – a systematic trigger of active brake units,
cars seven through ten, forcing main brake arrest.
Alert code 521 decimal 6911 – irregular breach of door seal, door 34,
car eight, lower.
I hurried along the upper deck of the train, heading for the rear. Some
cabin doors opened and anxious faces looked out. ‘No need for concern!’ I
called in my best Trans-Continental tone, backing it up with a gentle surge
of will that slammed doors after me like a drum roll.
At car six, I had to go down to the lower deck because of the dining
salon. Passing into car seven, I saw three train staffers hurrying down the
companionway in the direction of car eight.
The lower hallway of car eight was bitterly cold and a gale was blowing
down it. I saw six or seven rail employees pulling on foul weather gear and
lighting flares as they jumped down out of the open wagon door into the
night. Several more were grouped around the monitor display and one, a
steward, saw me approach.
‘Please go back to your cabin, sir. Everything’s fine.’
‘What seems to be the problem?’
‘Just hurry back, sir. What is your cabin number? I’ll bring along
complimentary liqueurs in a few minutes.’
‘The rear brakes have just thrown and door 34 is open,’ I said.
He blinked. ‘How did you—’
‘What’s going on?’
‘Sir, I want to guarantee your comfort, so if you’d just like to—’
I didn’t have time for a debate. ‘What’s going on, Inex?’ I asked, reading
his name off his brass lapel badge and juicing my words with just a touch of
will. A name always helped to enhance the mental coercion.
He blinked. ‘The brake systems in the rear four wagons have engaged,
which triggered an overall braking incident,’ he said, quickly and
obediently.
‘Did someone pull the emergency rope?’
‘No, sir. We’d have a source for that, and anyway the train’s entire brake
system would have fired simultaneously. We believe it’s ice in the aft units.’
‘That would cause a partial brake lock?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘What about the door?’
‘It opened just after we stopped. The chief steward thinks it was one of
the engineers, opening the door to get out and check the brakes without
informing the system he was unlocking the door.’
‘It wasn’t forced?’
‘It was opened from inside. With a key.’ The effects of my will were
ebbing and his jocular tone returned. ‘We’ve got personnel out lineside
now, sir, checking the brakes.’
‘Including this engineer who supposedly opened the door in his
eagerness to find the fault?’
‘I’m sure, sir.’
‘Find out,’ I said, using the will more forcefully.
He ran back to the monitor panel, and his colleagues stood back, puzzled,
as he operated the device.
‘Who has access to door keys?’
‘Who the hell are you?’ one of the others asked.
‘A concerned member of the public,’ I said, blanketing them all with will
power. ‘Who has keys?’
‘Only engineers of level two and higher, class one stewards and the
guards,’ said another, stammering in his desperation to tell me.
‘How many people is that?’
‘Twenty-three.’
‘Are they all accounted for?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Inex.
‘Stand aside,’ I ordered, and used my ring on the monitor. The train had a
staff and crew of eighty-four. Each one had a sub-dermal tracker implant so
that the train master could account for the location of his people at all times.
The display showed a graphic map of the train, but the screen was so small
I had to scroll along it, looking at the schematic bit by bit. Master personnel
were shown in red, engineers in amber, stewards in green and guards in
blue. Ancilliary staff like chefs, waiters, porters and cleaners were pink.
Red and amber dots clustered in the locomotive section, and blue and
green ones were speckled throughout the wagons. The upper deck of car
nine, the crew quarters, was full of pink lights. I saw a cluster of green and
blue cursors that represented the men grouped around me at the back of car
eight’s lower deck, near door 34. A sub-menu listed the amber and blue
lights that had left the train to inspect the running gear.
There was one green light amongst the pink ones in car nine. I called up
more information. The green light belonged to Steward Class One Rebert
Awins. He was in his quarters.
The express had made an emergency stop and all the staff apart from the
ancilliaries were moving to secure the train. Except Awins.
‘Awins is class one. He’d have keys.’
‘Yes, sir,’ said Inex.
‘Why isn’t he assisting?’
They all looked at each other.
‘When did you last see him?’
‘He was on the morning shift today,’ said one of them.
‘I saw him in the rec room at shift change having his lunch,’ added
another.
‘Since then?’
They shook their heads.
‘He should have come on again at nine,’ said Inex. ‘Shall I check on
him?’
No, I was going to say. Because he’s dead. But there was no point scaring
them.
I changed my mind. ‘Do that, Inex,’ I reached over and took the intercom
headset off the man nearest me. He didn’t protest. He didn’t even notice.
‘Go to his room and tell me what you find. Vox channel...’ I studied the
headset’s small ear piece and adjusted the responder. ‘...six.’
‘Yes sir,’ said Inex. As he turned to go, I reached out and touched him
briefly on the forehead. He shuddered. My psi-imprint would stay with him
for a good thirty minutes now, even once he was out of my vicinity.
Inex ran off.
I looked at the car door. It had been pulled to, but the ‘unsecure’ light
was still blinking. There were thawing cakes of dirty ice on the metal deck
inside the door.
‘How many people went out?’ I asked.
One of them checked the display. ‘Twenty, sir.’
‘How many have come back inside since you got here?’
‘None,’ they all said.
THEY WOULD BE looking for me. For us. They knew we were on the train,
and they’d got someone aboard at Fonette or Locastre. Someone who had
befriended Rebert Awins, killed him and taken his pass keys. Someone with
the technical expertise to trigger a partial brake lock, stop the train and then
use Awin’s keys to open an exterior door and let his associates aboard.
Someone who, by now, surely knew which cabins we were occupying.
I ran back down the train towards car three, using the lower deck
hallways. I slid Barbarisater from its nedskin scabbard. It seemed so
incongruous to be hurrying down a train’s companionway brandishing a
sword. But the cabins around me were full of innocent Imperial citizens and
I didn’t dare use my pistol.
I also didn’t dare use the intercom.
I reached out psychically. Eleena was an untouchable blank, so I called to
Aemos, Crezia and Medea.
Be ready. Trouble coming.
I passed several train staff in the hall as I made my way past and they
jumped back in alarm as they saw the blade.
Forget! I willed at each one as I passed, and they just went on their way.
I reached the front end of car four and prepared to go up. A Trans-
Continental steward lay face down on the stairs, his neck snapped.
Just then, the frantic voice of Inex wailed into my earpiece. ‘He’s dead!
Oh God-Emperor! He’s dead! Rebert’s dead! Sound the alarm!’
The distress klaxon started to warble and recessed light plates in the wall
began to blink orange. I saw a third red light had lit up on the car-end
monitor panel.
I jammed my signet ring against the reader and cued information.
Alert code 946 decimal 2452 – irregular breach of window seal, window
146, car three, upper.
I clambered over the steward’s corpse and made my way up the stairs.
The upper hallway of car three was even colder than the chill of car eight.
The end window on the port side, beside the intercarriage articulation, was
wide open and freezing air and snow was whirling in. The window had
been cut out of its frame with a powerblade or melta torch.
The light was bad. Gloomy, half-dimmed lamps aggravated by the fretful
blink of the alarm lights. The klaxons still whooped.
I realised there were three dark shapes halfway down the hall ahead of
me, skulking low. They hadn’t heard me arrive over the howl of the blizzard
and the shrill of the alarms.
I hugged the panelled wall. Barbarisater throbbed, hungry. Even
passively, I could sense the three men were psi-shielded. They made big
silhouettes. Combat armour. I saw the ugly shadow of an assault weapon as
the point man waved his partners forward.
Forward towards the doors of our compartments.
I edged closer.
The point man, oozing professionalism as he visually checked his rear,
saw me.
And all hell broke loose.
FOURTEEN
Barbarisater versus the janissaries.
Etrik, blade to blade.
Lunchtime drinks in New Gevae.
THE TWO KILLERS nearest me turned and opened fire with blunt, large
calibre autoguns. I suppose the sword in my hand was a damn give away,
but they’d have killed me anyway, even if they had mistaken me for a
wayward bystander.
They were professional killers, Vessorine janissaries. They had a job to
do, a contract to fulfil, and anyone in their way was a target.
The fact that they were using solid-round weapons confirmed they were
Vessorine. The ultimate military pragmatists. They’d tailed the train in a
poorly-insulated speeder and deployed through a blizzard. In those
conditions, standard las-weapons might have died, their cell-power drained
by the cold. But a well-lubricated autogun would fire below freezing. It had
only to rely on its percussive hammer action.
Vessorine janissaries. I had faced them before without knowing what they
were. Now I knew, and their formidable reputation almost gave me pause.
Vessorines, three of them. Plated in combat armour and firing heavyweight
man-stopper ammunition. Frankly, I’d rather have squared off with angry
Kasrkin.
But Barbarisater was in my hand, alert and alive. I had been using my
will openly for some time, and that had quickened its strength. I made a
ghan fasl, the figure-eight stroke and smashed the first three shots away,
impact sparks sheeting from the energised sword blade. Then I struck an
uwe sax, an ulsar and a ura wyla bei in rapid series, deflecting squashed
rounds into the panelling around me. Wood splintered.
I dived sideways as further shots punched into the hallway carpet and
exploded on the inter-wagon doors. People were screaming in the cabins all
around.
I rolled and came up on my feet as the first Vessorine rounded the car-end
corner and fired half a dozen times. His ejecting shell-cases pattered off his
torso in a fog of blue smoke and his gun muzzle lit up like a blowtorch.
Point blank.
Except I was behind him.
His gunfire shredded the wagon wall and ruptured the window frame.
Barbarisater removed his head.
The second one was charging and firing too. He let out a mask-muffled
bellow as he saw his comrade collapse in pieces.
I threw an ura geh sequence that diverted the white blurs of his bullets,
then followed in with a uin tahn wyla that chopped the barrel off his
weapon, a reverse tahn stroke that severed his forearms, and then the ewl
caer. The death stroke.
Hot red blood was already spurting from his arm stumps and steaming in
the freezing air as Barbarisater plunged through his ceramite chest armour
and burst his heart. The gunshot walls were painted with instantly frozen
dribbles of bloody ice.
A bullet creased the corner of my jaw with enough force to rip open the
flesh of my chin and knock me to the carpet. I tried to rise, but the third
Vessorine was right over me. I heard his weapon rack.
He screamed. I smelled a burning in the cold air.
I looked up.
The Vessorine was trying to shield himself, as if from a swarm of
stinging insects. Crezia’s cyber skulls were flitting around him, stabbing
repeatedly with their surgical lasers.
His yelps were cut off by the double crack of a las-weapon.
The janissary collapsed like a deadweight at my feet.
I looked down the hall and saw Eleena Koi in the doorway of my room,
holding her pistol in a defiant two-handed grip.
‘Eleena!’ I yelled. ‘Get the others out of the compartment! Get them out
into the hall and move them this way!’
‘But Medea—’ she began.
‘Do it!’
I ran to the cut-out car window and hauled myself out into the vicious
chill. I had to sheath Barbarisater and it didn’t like it. Outside, it was bone-
achingly cold and the blizzard pummelled me with hail hard as stones.
There was precious little in the way of handholds and the exterior of the car
was iced up.
I found something to cling to... solid runnels of ice, I think. My fingers
went numb.
I hauled myself up onto the roof of car three, the vast snow-peppered
blackness of the Atenate night above me.
The blizzard ensured I couldn’t see far. I could barely stand up. The
convex aluminium roof of the wagon was iced smooth as a skating rink.
A few steps along and my legs went out. I fell smack on my front, dazed
and winded. Blood filled my mouth; I had bitten my tongue.
Spitting blood and made angry by the pain, I dragged myself forward
through the elemental deluge. I saw shapes ahead of me in the white-on-
black maelstrom. Three more armoured figures on the edge of the roof.
They had lowered a directional detonator onto the window of the cabin I
had shared with Aemos. As I watched, they triggered it and blasted the
window inwards in a hail of glass and fire. The first janissary began to rope
down to swing in through the blown window. His comrades were hunched
on the rooftop, anchoring his lines.
I leapt up and Barbarisater flew out, crackling in the wet air.
The augmented Carthean warblade came down, splitting the lines in two
and cutting deeply into the wagon roof. The descending killer shrieked as
he fell away down the side of the two storey carriage.
The other two jerked round like lightning, one going for his sidearm, the
other leaping at me with clawing hands. A tahn wyla met him and bisected
his head like a ripe gummice fruit.
The corpse rolled off the car top into the darkness. I stood ready,
Barbarisater twitching in my hands. The remaining Vessorine backed away,
aiming a large calibre autopistol at me. The two of us could barely stand,
such was the blizzard’s windshear.
He fired once. An ulsar flicked the round away. He fired again, his feet
slipping, and I made an uin ulsar that spat the bullet off into the darkness.
‘My name is Gregor Eisenhorn. I am the man you have been paid to kill.
Identify yourself.’
He hesitated. ‘My nomclat be Etrik, badge of Clansire. Clan Szober.’
‘Clansire Etrik. I’ve heard so much about you.’ I had to raise my voice
over the storm. ‘Vammeko Tarl mentioned your name.’
‘Tarl? He be—’
‘The one who let you aboard?’ I finished for him. ‘I thought so. I had a
feeling he’d been tailing me.’
‘Be it he you just slew.’
‘Is that so? Tough. Give yourself up.’
‘I will not.’
‘Uh huh. Tell me this, then... how much is Pontius paying your clan for
this work?’
‘Who be Pontius?’
‘Khanjar, then. Khanjar the Sharp.’
‘Enough.’
He fired again and then lunged at me, swinging a power sword up in his
left hand. Barbarisater knocked the whizzing slug away and then formed an
uwe sar to block the downswing of the glittering blade. There was a bark of
clashing energies.
I switched to a double-handed grip and ripped Barbarisater in a crosswise
stroke as Etrik tried to use his pistol again. The tip of the blade cut through
the gun’s body and left him with only a handgrip. But the Clansire’s sword,
a short yet robust falchion of antique design, darted in and sliced through
the meat of my right shoulder. I howled.
I snarled into a leht suf that rebounded his thrust and swung reversing
ulsars that parried two more fast cuts and put me on the front foot. Etrik
was a big man, with a considerable reach and alarming strength. That meant
even his most nimble and extended strikes were delivered with punishing
force. I did not recognise the blade technique he was using, although I was
aware that the warriors of Vessor considered sword skill one of the three
primary battle arts, devoting as much time to it during their training as to
gun lore and open hand. The very fact he was the owner of an heirloom
power weapon identified him as an expert.
My skills were a heterodox blend of methods that I had mastered over the
years, but at the core of them was the Ewl Wyla Scryi or ‘the genius of
sharpness’, the ancient Carthean swordmastery system.
On top of the Trans-Atenate Express, any blade methods had to be semi-
improvised. Neither of us were steady on our feet, our boots sliding on the
iced metal, and the gale dragged at us hard.
He kept attacking high, aiming for the throat, I imagine, and I was driven
into a variety of tahn feh sar parries with a tightly vertical blade that defend
the head and ear. My own attacks were lower, fon uls and fon uin strokes
that targeted the heart, belly and swordarm.
His defence was excellent, especially a sliding backdrag that fouled every
fon bei I struck in an attempt to push his blade down laterally and open his
guard. His attack strokes were inventively arhythmic, preventing all but the
most last moment anticipations. He was hideously skilful.
I wondered if that was why Pontius Glaw had hired these Vessorines. He
was such a connoisseur of martial skills and warrior breeds. He didn’t just
want killers. He wanted masters of the killing art.
In Clansire Etrik, he’d got his money’s worth.
I realised that the mercenary, with a combination of cross parries and
driving thrust strokes, was pressing me back towards the gap between
carriages three and four. I was cornered with my back to the drop, my
combat options restricted. I didn’t dare risk a backwards jump without
looking, and I couldn’t take my eyes off his sword for a moment. I knew he
would be building up to a sharp frontal attack that would either catch me
with no room to dodge or topple me off the edge.
Carthean sword-craft teaches that when an imminent attack is
unavoidable, the only practical response is to limit or force it. The
technique, which has many forms, is called the gej kul asf, which means
‘the bridled steed’. It imagines the adversary is an unbroken mount who is
going to charge no matter what you do, and that your blade is a long-reined
bridle that will control that charge on your terms. Etrik was going to lunge,
so I needed to reduce the lunging options. I went into an ehn kulsar, where
the sword is raised, two-handed, with the hilt above shoulder height and the
blade tipped down in a thirty-five degree angle from the horizontal. Sharp,
lateral blade turns robbed him of any sideways or upper body opportunities.
His only option was to come in low, parrying up, to get in underneath my
guard. I was forcing him to target my lower body, an area his sword-play
had shown he didn’t favour. It also required him to extend in a low, ill-
balanced way.
Etrik made the lunge, shoulder down and sword rising from a hip-height
grip. My ‘bridle’ entirely determined the height and direction of the thrust.
Instead of backing or attempting to knock his rising blade aside with a
diagonal stroke, I sidestepped, like a bull-dancer evading a head-down
aurox in the karnivale pits of Mankareal. Now he was running his sword
into empty space.
He tried to pull in, but he’d committed his weight behind it. His left foot
kicked out on the roof ice and his right one went skidding sideways. Etrik
grunted out a curse and did the only thing he could. He turned his lunge into
a leap.
He just made the roof of the next wagon, his chest and arms slamming
into it, his legs wheeling over the drop. His falchion had a pommel spike
and he slammed it down into the roof to anchor himself, his boots trying to
get a grip on the weatherproof plastic sides of the intercarriage articulation.
I had seconds to turn my temporary advantage into a permanent upper
hand.
But my hasty sidestep had left me with no more purchase on the iced roof
than Etrik. My legs suddenly flew out from under me and I crashed down
on my back. I rolled as fast as I could and fumbled for a handhold, but it
cost me Barbarisater. The precious sword squealed as it tumbled over the
edge of the roof.
I was holding on, barely. Etrik’s pommel spike shrieked across the roof
metal as he put his weight onto it and dug in. With a few scrabbling kicks,
he hoisted himself up onto the roof of car four and looked back at me. He
chuckled an ugly jeer as he saw me worse off than he was.
Still chuckling, he gingerly took one step out onto the top of the
intercarriage articulation, and then another, balancing as he crossed back to
car three to finish me off.
Another two steps, and he would be within stabbing range.
I decided which of my handholds was most secure and let go with the
other, fumbling round behind myself.
Etrik came off the articulation, took the last step, his sword raised to rip
at me, and found himself looking down the barrel of my autopistol.
It was contrary to all the noble rules of the Ewl Wyla Scryi to start a
sword duel and finish it with a gun. The Carthean masters would have been
ashamed of me. But I wasn’t feeling particularly noble by then.
I fired just once. The shot hit him in the sternum and slammed him
backwards. With a cheated look on his face, Etrik disappeared off the far
side of the roof.
I WAS EXHAUSTED, and drained from the extreme cold, by the time I got
back inside the car. The upper hallway was full of people. Stewards were
ushering terrified and distraught passengers into other cars. Master
personnel were gazing in perplexed dismay at the fight damage and the trio
of Vessorine corpses. Eleena was arguing heatedly with one of the master
crewmen.
Everyone looked round and someone screamed as I slithered back in
through the window. I must have looked a sight: caked in frost and frozen
blood from the wounds to my arm and chin.
Crezia and Aemos pushed through the onlookers and reached my side.
‘I’m alright.’
‘Let me look at that... Golden Throne!’ gasped Crezia, twisting my head
to study the gash in my chin.
‘Don’t fuss.’
‘You need—’
‘Now’s not the time. Is Medea all right?’
‘Yes,’ said Aemos.
‘So you’re all unscathed?’
‘You’re wounded enough for all of us,’ Crezia said.
‘I’ve had worse,’ I said.
‘He has,’ agreed Aemos. ‘He’s had worse.’
Eleena was still shouting at the train master, who was shouting right back
at her. He was a tall, distinguished man in an ornate, brocaded version of
the Trans-Continental uniform topped with a Navy-style cap. Clearly very
old, his eyes, nose and ears had been replaced with augmetic implants:
primitive, functional devices finished in boiler-metal black that probably
had been handcrafted for him by the locomotive’s devoted engineers. Even
his teeth, framed by a spectacular white tile beard, were cast iron. His name
was Alivander Suko, and I later discovered that he had been master of the
Trans-Atenate Express for three hundred and seventy-eight years. He
looked like a bearded locomotive in human form.
I pulled Eleena back and faced him.
‘I demand an explanation,’ Suko growled, his voice reverberating from a
mechanical larynx, ‘for this... outrage. Nothing like this has ever happened
aboard the Trans-Atenate. This vulgar violence and impropriety—’
‘Impropriety?’ I echoed.
‘Are you responsible for this?’ he asked.
‘I would not have chosen for this to occur, but... yes.’
‘Detain him now!’ Suko yelled. A pair of burly train guards who had
withdrawn laspistols from the express’s emergency locker the moment the
alarms had started sounding, stepped forward.
‘There are three dead here, three more outside,’ I said softly, looking into
the train master’s electric-shuttered eyes and pointedly ignoring the guards.
‘All armoured, all armed... combat warriors. Do you really think it’s a good
idea to mess with the man who killed them?’
Silence fell on the corridor, colder and harsher than the ice storm still
gusting in through the shattered window. All eyes were on us, including, to
Suko’s discomfort, the last of the gawping passengers still being herded out.
‘Shall we continue this in private?’ I suggested.
WE WENT INTO one of the vacated cabins. I opened the hinged wooden
cover of the suite’s little cogitator, switched it to hololithic mode and
pressed my signet ring against the data-reader. The little desk projected a
hologram of the Inquisitorial seal, overlaid by credential details, followed
by a slowly turning three dimensional scan of my head.
‘I am Inquisitor Gregor Eisenhorn of the Ordos Helican,’ Suko and his
guards were speechless.
‘Do you accept that, or would you like me to rotate slowly in front of you
until you’re convinced?’
The train master looked at me, so taken aback he barely knew what to
say. ‘I’m sorry, my lord,’ he began. ‘How can Trans-Continental assist the
work of the mighty ordos?’
‘Well, sir, you can get this train moving again for a start.’
‘But—’
I’d had enough. ‘I have been travelling incognito, sir. But not any more.
And if I’m going to reveal myself as an inquisitor, I’m damn well going to
behave like one. This train is now under my control.’
WE REMAINED HALTED long enough for the engineers to service the brakes
and secure the exploded windows. And long enough for the train guards,
under my direct supervision, to search the entire vehicle for any other
passengers without tickets.
Wrapped in crew-issue foul-weather gear, I went outside and retrieved
Barbarisater, which complained fractiously about being left in the blizzard.
I sheathed the whining blade and went to check on the three janissaries who
lay sprawled and stiffening in the snow.
THE EXPRESS RESUMED progress at five and there were no more
interruptions. We thundered out of the night and into a more temperate
dawn where the land was thick with snow but the ice storms had abated.
Suko raced the locomotive right up to the safety margins to make up
time. The express cut down through the southern extremities of the Atenate
Range, descending through hill country and rocky glacial plains. If I’d been
awake, I would have seen hard pasture and scree slowly blooming into
forest and deciduous woodland, and then the first little hamlets of the vast
Southern Plateau, sunlit in the morning air.
But I was deep asleep, my wounds dressed, Barbarisater slumbering
fitfully at my side and Crezia watching over me.
I WOKE AFTER five, with the express still making excellent time. We were
due in at New Gevae at midnight. I’d given Suko strict instructions to send
no word ahead of our plight.
It was likely that Pontius would try again at New Gevae. I studied the
route map and thought about getting Suko to make an unscheduled stop at
one of the satellite stations in the towns north of New Gevae. We could
disembark and hire air transport, and the train could run on to the city.
I thought my implacable and attentive enemy might anticipate this move.
And I also considered that arriving in plain view at a major city terminal
might be the safer plan.
I lay on my cabin’s cot, meditating as the lowland scenery of the plateau
zipped by outside. Medea was up and around by then, hobbling painfully
and using, of all things, my runestaff as a crutch. Only she would have the
wit to dare such disrespect.
She limped into my cabin and flopped down on the edge of my cot,
nursing her sore back. Crezia was asleep in the opposite berth.
‘Never a dull moment, eh?’ said Medea.
‘Never.’
She nodded over at Crezia. ‘She didn’t leave your side, Gregor. All day.’
‘I know.’
‘She’s more than just an old friend, isn’t she?’
‘Yes, Medea.’
‘You and your secrets.’
‘I know.’
‘You never told me.’
‘I never told anyone. Crezia Berschilde deserved the privacy.’
She glanced at me. ‘Gregor Eisenhorn deserved the privacy too, don’t
you think? You may be a great and terrible inquisitor and everything, but
you’re a human being too. You have a life outside this awful work.’
I thought about that. Sadly, I didn’t agree.
‘But you’re together again, then. You and the good doctor.’
‘I have renewed a friendship I should never have allowed to lapse.’
‘Yeah, right. Renewed,’ She made a surprisingly coarse and graphic
gesture.
I couldn’t help but smile. ‘Was there something else, or did you just come
in to demonstrate the vulgar extremes of your miming ability?’
‘Yeah, there was something else. What do we do when we get there?’
NEW GEVAE WAS a cluster of monolithic hive pyramids covering the delta
of the Sanas river. We could see its twinkling lights in the distance over an
hour before we arrived. The Trans-Atenate Express rattled and hissed into
the main terminal at two minutes to midnight. I got out ahead of the crowds
and strode across the wide concourse under the arched glass roof to the
Astropathic Guild’s office near the freight cargo pens.
I accessed the Aegis account and read the reply from Nayl. He agreed
that it was like the trouble on Eechan, and cursed Sadia’s name. He said the
Caucus was ready to ship out, and that he would be at a bar called
Entipaul’s Lounge at noon the next day. The bar was in hive four, level
sixty.
I looked at the communiqué sadly and then glanced at the waiting adept.
‘Two word reply. “Rosethorn attends”. Send it.’
I WALKED INTO Entipaul’s Lounge the next day at a minute before noon. It
was a cage of aluminium tubes and spray-painted flakboard panels artfully
wired up so that the ropes of lights pulsed in time to the pound music the
place pumped through the caster system. The place wanted to seem tough
and underhive and dangerous, but it was all for show. This was a lunchtime
and after-work watering hole for mid-hive clerks and Administratum
graders, a place for assignations with winsome girls from the logosticator
pool, the celebrations that accompanied promotions or retirements, or
rowdy birthday drinks. I’d been into real twist bars and heard genuine
pound. This place was just sham, theatre.
I was shrouded in Aemos’s over-robe, the hood pulled up, wearing a
rebreather mask I’d borrowed from the express. I wanted to look like some
tech-adept on his lunch break, or a warewright stealing off for a tryst with
his girl.
The place was largely empty. A bored-looking steward polished glasses
behind the narrow sweep of the bar, and two uniformed waitresses chatted
in the rear doorway, holding their glass trays like riot shields. Half a dozen
men sat in the booths that radiated off the bar’s central hub, and a hooded
figure was sitting, drinking alone, with its back to the door.
I sat at one of the hub tables. One of the waitresses approached. She
smelled of obscura and her pencilled eyebrows framed wildly dilated eyes.
‘Choice?’
‘Tunderey clear-grain, double, in a chill-sleeve.’
‘Dokey-doke,’ she returned as she stalked away.
The music continued to blast. She returned with a single shot glass on her
suspensor tray. The glass was actually a cup of pressure-moulded ice. She
tonged it onto my table and caught the coin I flipped at her.
‘Keep the change,’ I murmured.
‘Big spender,’ she mocked and paced off, wiggling a backside that had
no business being wiggled.
I didn’t touch the drink. Gradually, the ice melted and the oily liquid
began to seep out over the table top.
The hooded figure got up and wandered over to me.
‘Rosethorn?’
I looked up. ‘That’s me.’
She dropped the hooded cloak away from her shoulders. She had sharp
features and long, straight black hair. Her kohl-edged eyes glinted like jade.
Not Harlon Nayl at all. Maria Tarray.
She sat down opposite me and knocked back my drink, licking the ice-
water off her long fingers.
‘You knew we’d get you sooner or later.’
‘I guess so. Who’s we?’
The other drinkers in the bar had got up and formed a circle around us,
sitting at adjacent tables. Maria Tarray clicked her fingers and they all drew
back coats or cloaks to reveal the handguns they carried. She clicked again
and the weapons disappeared.
‘So this is a trap?’
‘Of course.’
‘The astrograms weren’t from Nayl?’
‘Evidently.’
‘You’ve broken Glossia?’
‘How clever are we?’
I sat back. ‘How did you do that?’
‘Wouldn’t you like to know, Mr Eisenhorn?’
I shrugged. ‘Seeing as you’ve got me cold, yes. These men are more of
your damned Vessorine, aren’t they? I’m dead in my seat. I can’t see the
harm.’
‘I imagine you’ve guessed already,’ she said. She smiled. I could feel her
powerful mind trying to delve into mine.
‘Jekud Vance.’
‘That’s right, Mr Eisenhorn. Your astropath proved to be very useful.
With the right persuasion. And the Janissaries excel at persuasion. Vance
sent the communiqués, pretending to be Nayl. He knew Glossia.’
She probed at my mind again.
‘You’re using shielding techniques,’ she said, her face darkening.
‘Of course I am. You would be too if the situation was reversed. I have to
say though, I’m disappointed. I was hoping that Pontius might be here
himself. This is a trap after all. Eisenhorn’s last stand. He might have been
civil enough to come and watch me die.’
‘Pontius is busy elsewhere,’ she snapped, and then realised what she’d
said.
‘Thank you for that confirmation,’ I said.
‘You bastard!’ she snapped. ‘You’re dead! What good will it do you?
This is a trap!’
‘Yes, it is. A trap.’
She hesitated. The janissaries had all risen, guns out, aiming at me. The
bar staff were fleeing, terrified.
Maria Tarray slowly reached out and took the rebreather mask off my
face.
‘Etrik?’ she stammered, her jade eyes wide.
‘Yes,’ I said, three kilometres away in a locked lodging house room,
sweating and straining as I channelled my will via the runestaff and
animated the body of Clansire Etrik.
Tarray leapt back from the table, knocking over her chair. ‘Damnation!’
she shrieked. ‘He’s got us! He’s got us! How the hell did he know?’
‘You could talk like Nayl and use Glossia thanks to Jekud, but Jekud
didn’t know what Nayl knew. We fought Sadia on Lethe Eleven, not
Eechan,’ I had Etrik say.
Maria Tarray drew a plasma pistol and shot Etrik through the chest. The
Vessorines all around opened fire with their autoguns and las-carbines.
As my puppet was torn apart, I let go of the warp vortex that had been
spinning in my mind ever since I had summoned it.
It surged out of Etrik’s collapsing body and expanded, annihilating the
janissaries, Entipaul’s Lounge and the entire level sixty deck of hive four in
a radius of fifty metres.
Maria Tarray was atomised. In the last milliseconds of her life, her
mental shields collapsed in terror and I got a precious snapshot into her
powerful psyker mind. Not everything, but enough.
Enough to know that I had just annihilated Pontius Glaw’s daughter.
FIFTEEN
Sanctum, Catharsis and Fischig.
Teht uin sah.
Promody.
FIFTEEN DAYS LATER, we were a long, long way from New Gevae, a long
way from Gudrun itself. I had, for the time being, evaded the clutches of
Khanjar the Sharp.
The morning before my meeting – or my puppet’s meeting, I should say
– with Maria Tarray in the mid-hive bar, Aemos and I had arranged passage
on a packet lighter called the Spirit of Wysten, and by the evening, we were
leaving the planet. Five and a half days out from Gudrun, in the vicinity of
Cyto, we rendezvoused with the Essene.
My old friend Tobias Maxilla, eccentric master of the sprint trader
Essene, had come in response to the Glossia code word ‘Sanctum’ without
hesitation, breaking off from his merchant runs in the Helican spinwards
and laying course for Gudrun. He had never been a formal part of my
operation, but he was an ally of long standing, and had provided the
services of his ship on many occasions.
He always claimed to do this for financial reward – I regularly made sure
the ordos remunerated him handsomely – and to keep on the good side of
the Imperial Inquisition. Privately, I believe his allegiance to me was the
product of an adventurous streak. Getting involved in my business offered
more diverting occupation than a trade voyage down the Helican worlds.
There was no ship, and no ship’s master, that I trusted more than Tobias
Maxilla and the Essene. With my life shattered, my back to the wall and an
enemy after my blood, he was the one I turned to for rescue and escape.
One could also always rely on Maxilla to lift a company’s spirits. In
truth, the mood in my little group had been uncomfortable since New
Gevae. And that was largely my own fault.
As soon as I had realised that ‘Nayl’ was just another of Glaw’s deceits, a
ruse to lure me into a trap, I had set my trap in return. Certain sections of
the Malus Codicium concerned the creation and remote animation of thralls
– human beings psionically controlled as puppets. I had never tried the
technique, for it seemed ghoulish. The Codicium suggested the process
worked best with a freshly killed cadaver. But on the other hand, it was
simply an elaborate extension of my use of will, and it suited my purpose.
I didn’t go into detail about what I was going to do, but Medea, Eleena,
Crezia and Aemos knew something unorthodox was afoot, and they were
all concerned when I had Etrik’s body covertly taken from the train to a
lodging we had rented in hive four. Crezia mumbled something about body
snatching, and Medea was dubious. Back aboard the Pulchritude, she’d
shrugged off as a joke the idea that I was dabbling too far. She seemed to
have accepted the whole business with Cherubael.
Now she seemed less confident about esoteric psyker tricks.
Even Aemos seemed reserved. He had not said a word about the Malus
Codicium since he’d seen me remove it from the safe in my study. And he’d
made it clear on several occasions that he trusted my judgement.
But there had still been a feeling in the air.
I kept them out of the room while I performed the rituals, and that may
have been a mistake too. Except for Eleena, who was spared the sensations,
they all felt the unnerving, creeping backwash of the act.
I had also never used a warp vortex before, but it seemed the only
weapon I could equip my thrall with that would trap the trappers. In
hindsight, I wonder if the Malus Codicium had planted the idea in my head.
The vortex worked. It destroyed the enemies who had tried to snare me. I
doubt I will use one again. The feedback left me unconscious, and I was ill
and weak for two days afterwards. My friends had to break down the door
of the room to get at me, and they must have been shaken by the sight that
greeted them. The burnt circle on the floor, the psy-plasmic residue trickling
off the walls, the symbols I had painted. I think they felt for the first time
that I had attempted something I wasn’t quite in control of.
Perhaps they were right.
None of them had wanted to talk about it. Aemos had found the Malus
Codicium on the floor beside me and slipped it into his pocket before the
others could see it. Later, aboard the Spirit of Wysten, he’d handed it back to
me privately
‘I don’t want to touch it again,’ he said. ‘I don’t think I want to see it
again.’
I was unhappy at his reaction. His life was devoted to the acquisition of
knowledge – it was an actual clinical compulsion in his case – but there he
was rejecting a source of secret data, albeit dark, that could be found almost
nowhere else in the galaxy. I thought he alone might appreciate its worth.
‘It’s the Malus Codicium, isn’t it?’
‘Yes.’
‘They never found it. On Farness Beta, after Quixos fell, the ordos
searched for it and never found it.’ ‘That’s true.’
‘Because you took it for yourself and never told them,’ ‘Yes. It was my
decision.’
‘I see. And that’s how you learned to control daemonhosts too, isn’t it?’
‘Yes.’
‘I’m disappointed in you, Gregor.’
MAXILLA WAS, AS ever, the perfect host, and the general spirit did pick up
a little once we were in his company. He met us at the Essene’s fore
starboard airgate, dressed in a chequered sedril gown-coat, a blue silk cravat
pinned with a golden star pin and a purple suede calotte with a silver tassel.
His skin dye was gloss white with black hearts over his eyes, and a fine
platinum chain ran between the diamond earring in his left lobe to the
sapphire stud in his nose. Behind him, gold-plated servitors waited with
salvers of refreshments. He greeted us all, flirting with Medea and making a
particular fuss of Crezia and Eleena, two females he had not met before.
‘Where to?’ was his first question to me.
‘Let me use your astropath, and set course for the place we first met.’
I SENT WORD, in Glossia, to Fischig, telling him to alter his route to avoid
Gudrun and meet me at a new rendezvous point. ‘Thorn wishes Hound, at
Hound’s cradle, by sext.’ Maxilla’s cadaverous, nameless Navigator
performed his hyper-mathematical feats of divination, and set the Essene
thundering into warp space as fast as its potent drive could carry it.
As always, I was unable to rest easily while travelling in the hellish
netherworld of the warp, so instead I retired with Maxilla to his stateroom.
He was a terrible gossip and always relished a few hours catching up
whenever we were reunited. Surrounded as he was by a crew that was more
servitor than human, he did so crave company.
But I had been looking forward to a private talk. I’d never confided in
him particularly before, but now I felt he might be the only man in the
Imperium who would give me a fair hearing. And if not fair, then at least
one free of harsh judgment. Maxilla was a rogue. He made no excuses
about it. His entire life had been devoted to testing the ductile qualities of
rules and regulations. I wanted, I suppose, to find out what he thought of
me.
His stateroom was a double-storey cabin behind the Essene’s cathedral-
like main bridge. A ten-seat banquet table of polished duralloy that I had
dined at many times before occupied a mezzanine area at the far end under
a domed section of roof that could peel back shielding at the wave of a
control wand to become an observation blister.
Curved stairways, with tetrawood balustrades that Maxilla claimed had
been salvaged from a twenty mast sunjammer on Nautilia, ran down from
either end of the mezzanine onto the main deck area, a wide hall with a
floor of inlaid marble. Works of art – paintings, statues, antiques, hololiths –
were displayed all round the room between the crystelephantine wall pillars.
Some were protected by softly glowing stasis fields, others hung
weightlessly in invisible repulsor beams.
Elegant scroll-armed couches and chairs, some draped with throws of
Sampanese light-cloth, were arranged on a large rectangle of exquisite
Olitari rugwork in the centre of the room. The rug alone was worth a small
fortune. The room was illuminated by six shimmering chandeliers from the
glassworks of Vitria, each one suspended by a small antigrav plate so they
floated below the dished ceiling.
I sat down on a couch and accepted the balloon of amasec Maxilla
handed to me. ‘You look like a man who wishes to unburden himself,
Gregor,’ he said, taking a seat opposite.
‘Am I so transparent?’
‘No, I fear it is rather more a case that I am hopeful. It’s been a boring
few months. I crave excitement. And when the only man I know who makes
a habit of getting involved in the most ridiculously perilous ventures anyone
ever heard of calls to me for help, I perk up.’
He fitted a lho-stick into a long silver holder, lit it with a tiny flick of his
digital ring weapon and sat back, exhaling spiced smoke, rolling the amasec
in his glass around with an experienced hand.
‘I...’ I tried to begin, but I didn’t really know where to start.
He put his glass down and made a gesture with his control wand like a
theatrical conjuror. The air became close and slightly muffled.
‘Speak freely,’ he told me. ‘I’ve activated the suite’s privacy field.’
‘Actually,’ I admitted, ‘my hesitation was more to do with not knowing
what to say.’
‘I deal in routes and journeys, Gregor. In my experience, the best place to
start is always—’
‘The beginning? I know.’
I told him, first in general terms and then with increasing detail, about the
events as they had unfolded. Durer. Thuring. The battles with Cruor Vult
and Cherubael. His dyed face became tragic, like a clown’s, as I told him
about Alizebeth. He had always had a soft spot for her.
Though I felt I had taken his advice and started from the beginning, I
realised more and more that I had not. I kept going back, filling in details.
To explain Cherubael, I had to go back to Farness Beta and the struggle
against Quixos, and that in turn required mention of the mission to
Cinchare. I told him about the assault on Spaeton House and our desperate
flight across Gudrun. I recounted the murders that had taken place across
the sub-sector. He’d known Harlon Nayl and Nathun Inshabel, not to
mention several other members of my team. My account of Pontius Glaw’s
revenge was a litany of bad tidings.
Once I had begun, I couldn’t stop. I spared nothing. It felt liberating to
confess everything at last and unburden myself. I told him about the Malus
Codicium, and how I might have compromised myself by keeping it. I told
him about my dabbling with daemonhosts. And thralls. And warp vortices. I
owned up to the deal I had struck with Glaw on Cinchare and how that had
empowered him and turned him into the threat that now pursued me.
‘Everyone, Tobias, everyone in my operation – my family, if you will –
everyone except you, Fischig and the handful I brought aboard here with
me, has died because of what I did on Cinchare. Something in the order of...
well, I haven’t made an exact count. Two hundred servants of the
Imperium. Two hundred people who had devoted themselves to my cause in
the firm belief that I was doing good work... are dead. I’m not even
counting the likes of Poul Rassi, Dudane Haar and that poor bastard
Verveuk who perished in what turns out to be the overture to this bloodbath.
Or Magos Bure, who must have been killed by Glaw for him to have
escaped.’
‘Might I correct you, Gregor?’ he asked.
‘By all means.’
‘You called it your cause. That they were devoted to your cause. But it
isn’t, is it?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘You still, passionately, believe that you are doing the Emperor’s work?’
‘Damn right I do!’
‘Then they died in the service of the Emperor. They died for His cause.
No Imperial citizen can ask for anything more.’
‘I don’t think you were listening, Maxilla—’
He got to his feet. ‘No, I don’t think you were, inquisitor. Not even to
yourself. I’m pressing this point because it’s so basic you seem to have
overlooked it.’
He walked across the stateroom and stood looking up at a hololithic
portrait of an Imperial warrior. It was very old. I didn’t want to think where
he might have got it from.
‘Do you know who this is?’
‘No.’
‘Warmaster Terfuek. Commanded the Imperial forces in the Pacificus
War, almost fifty centuries ago. Ancient history now. Most of us couldn’t
say what the damn war was about any more. At the Battle of Corossa,
Terfeuk committed four million Imperial Guardsman to the field. Four
million, Gregor. They don’t do battles like that any more, thank the Throne.
It was of course the age of High Imperialism, the era of the notable
warmaster, the cult of personality. Anyway, Terfeuk got his victory. Not
even his advisors thought he could win at Corossa, but he did. And of those
four million men, only ninety thousand left the field alive.’
Maxilla turned and looked at me. ‘Do you know what he said? Terfeuk?
Do you know what he said of that terrible cost?’
I shook my head.
‘He said it was the greatest honour of his life to have served the Emperor
so well.’
‘I’m happy for him.’
‘You don’t understand, Gregor. Terfeuk was no butcher. No glory hound.
By all accounts he was humane, and beloved by his men as fair and
generous. But when the time came, he did not regret for a moment the cost
of serving the Emperor and preserving the Imperium against all odds.’
Maxilla sat down again. ‘I think that’s all you’re guilty of. Making hard
choices to serve the Emperor the best you can, to serve him where maybe
others would not be strong enough and fail. Doing your duty and living
with the consequences. I’m sure dear Terfeuk had sleepless nights for years
after Corossa. But he dealt with that pain. He didn’t have any regrets.’
‘Committing men to battle is not quite the same as—’
‘I beg to differ. Imperial society is your battleground. The people you
have lost were your soldiers. And soldiers are only martial resources. They
are there to be used. You used your own resources to win your battles. This
book you speak of. This daemonhost. He sounds fascinating. I’d love to
meet him.’
‘You wouldn’t, I assure you. And it’s an “it” not a “he”.’
Maxilla shrugged. ‘I fancy you wanted to talk to me about this because
you thought you might get a sympathetic ear. Me being an old rogue and
everything.’ There were times, I swear, I believed Maxilla could read my
mind.
‘Let me tell you something, Gregor. I love you like a brother, but we’re
nothing alike. I am a rogue. A gambler. A liar. A reprobate. My vices are
many and unmentionable. I never bend the rules; I break them. Snap them.
Shatter them. However and wherever I may. In that regard alone, I am a
kindred spirit. You are bending the rules of the Imperium, of the Inquisition.
You are, undoubtedly, what they call a radical. But that’s where the
similarity ends. I break the rules for my own gain. To get what I want, to
amplify my wealth and status. To make things better for me. Me. Just me.
But you’re not doing it for yourself. You’re doing it for the system you
believe in and the God-Emperor you worship and by damn, that means your
conscience can be clean.’
I was taken aback by the passion of his speech. I was also taken aback by
the suggestion – one that no one had dared make before – that I had become
a radical. When had that happened? My actions may have been radical but
did that make me a radical to the marrow?
Sitting there, in that opulent room, I realised Maxilla had hit on the truth,
a truth I had been denying. I had changed without recognising that change
in myself. I would always be grateful to Tobias Maxilla for that bruising
realisation. I felt better for it.
‘I suppose you can’t turn to your superiors for help?’
‘No,’ I said, still reeling from the fresh viewpoint.
‘Because you’d have to tell them things you don’t want them to hear?’
‘Of course. To get any kind of official help, I’d have to make a full
report. And that report would fall apart under the lightest scrutiny if it
omitted the Codicium, Cherubael. By the Throne, the list goes back! I even
hid Pontius Glaw from them. What could I say? Pontius Glaw is
exterminating my forces. Where did he come from, my lord grand master?
Well, to be honest, I’ve known of his existence for centuries, but I kept him
hidden from you. And he’s only up and around now because I decided to
give him a body.’
He chuckled. ‘I see your point. What will you tell Fischig? Dear Godwyn
is as straight up and down as any man I know.’
‘I’ll deal with Fischig.’
‘So what is your next move? You mentioned this daughter of his, the
psyker. You saw things when you killed her, didn’t you?’
I had indeed. Maria Tarray’s entire mental shield had crumbled just
before the vortex annihilated her. The picture I had obtained was far from
complete, but it was plentiful.
‘Maria Tarray was much older than she looked or claimed. She was the
bastard offspring of Pontius Glaw and a serving girl from Gudrun that Glaw
had taken with him to Quenthus Eight. Maria was born in 020, corrupted
from conception by the tainted tore Pontius wore. Several notorious heretics
who have evaded the Inquisition in the last three hundred years were
actually her under different guises. Many cases could be closed now she is
dead.’
‘Pontius won’t be too pleased.’
‘I imagine Pontius Glaw now wants me dead even more than before. But
they were after the Malus Codicium, you see. I learned that from her
undefended mind. Glaw knew Quixos must have it and, once Quixos was
dead, realised it must be in my possession. He wants that book so much.’
‘Do you know why?’
‘I saw images of an arid world just before Maria Tarray died. A dried out
husk where primaeval cities lay buried under layers of ash. Glaw’s after
something there, and he needs the Codicium to help him.’
‘What?’
‘I don’t know.’
‘Where?’
‘I don’t know that either. There was a name, a word in her mind. Ghul.
But I don’t know what it means or what it refers to. Her mind was in
collapse. Very little made sense.’
‘I’ll consult my charts and my navigator. Who knows?’ He sat forward
and looked at me. ‘This book. This Malus Codicium. May I see it?’
‘Why?’
‘Because I appreciate unique and priceless objects.’
I took it from my jacket and passed it to him. He studied it with
reverence, a smile on his face.
‘Not much to look at, but beautiful for what it is. Thank you for the
opportunity to hold it.’ He handed it back to me.
‘I can’t believe I’m going to say this,’ he added, ‘me of all people. But...
I’d destroy it, if I were you.’
‘I think you’re right. I believe I will.’
I put down my empty glass and walked to the doors. Maxilla evaporated
the privacy field.
‘Thank you for your time and hospitality, Tobias. I think I’ll turn in now.’
‘Sleep well.’
‘One last thing,’ I said, turning back in the doorway. ‘You said you break
the rules to get what you want. That you serve no one but yourself and
everything you do is for your own ends.’
‘I did.’
‘Then why do you help me so often?’
He smiled. ‘Good night, Gregor.’
THE ESSENE PUT in at Hubris four days later. Hubris was an outlying
world in the Helican sub-sector and Fischig, Bequin, Maxilla and I had all
met there for the first time in 240.
Indirectly, that’s where we’d first stumbled across Pontius Glaw too.
Everything was turning full circle in the strangest way.
I had rerouted Fischig here as a convenient and out of the way meeting
place, but it seemed apt. He’d been a chastener in the local arbites when
he’d first crossed my path. It was his homeworld.
For eleven out of every twenty-nine months, Hubris orbits so far beyond
its star that the population are forced to hibernate in massive cryogenic
tombs to survive the blackness and the cold. Those winters of eternal night
are called Dormant and I had experienced one on that last visit.
But now we arrived at the start of Thaw, the middle season between
Dormant and Vital.
The tombs had emptied and the great cities were waking under a pale
sun. The population was engaged in a frenzied jubilee of feasting and
dancing and general excess that lasted three weeks and was supposed to
celebrate the society’s rebirth, but which probably had deep rooted origins
in the traditional methods of recovery from extended cryogenic suspension
such as forced physical activity and high-calorie intake.
I offered to travel to the surface to meet him, partly because I thought
Crezia, Eleena and Medea could do with the relaxation of a festival and
Maxilla had never been one to turn down a party.
But Fischig answered he would as soon come up to the Essene, and he
arrived, piloting his own shuttle, a few hours later.
I could tell he was tense from the moment he stepped aboard. He was
polite, and seemed pleased to see Medea, Aemos and Maxilla. But with me
he was reserved.
I told him it was good to see him, and that I was relieved he had escaped
Glaw’s purge.
‘Glaw, eh?’ he said. He had heard all about the fall of the Distaff and our
other holdings. ‘I had wondered who it was.’ ‘We need to talk,’ I said.
‘Yes,’ he said. ‘But not here.’
MAXILLA LENT US his stateroom and I turned on the privacy field.
‘There’s nothing you couldn’t say in front of the others, Godwyn,’ I said.
‘No? Glaw’s killed everyone except us few. Because—’
‘Because?’
‘You should have destroyed that monster years ago, Eisenhorn. That, or
handed him over to the ordos. What the hell were you thinking?’
‘Same as I’m thinking now. I did what was best.’
‘Nayl? Inshabel? Bure? Suskova? The whole damn Distaff? That was
best?’ His tone was venomous.
‘Yes, Fischig. And I never heard you contradict my decisions.’
‘Like you’d have listened!’
‘To you? Yes. Not once did I hear you say we should turn Glaw over to
the ordos.’
‘Because you always make it sound so logical! Like you know best!’
I shrugged. ‘This is beneath you, Godwyn. It sounds like sour grapes.
Things didn’t turn out the way I would have wished and you’re making out
it’s all my fault. I took tough decisions that I thought were right. If you’d
ever – ever – objected, I’d have considered your opinion.’
‘Too easy, too damn easy. I was only ever your lackey, your minion. If
I’d said we vapourise Glaw, you’d have said yes and then hidden him
anyway.’
‘Do you really think I’m that underhand? You, of all my counsel, I
respect the most!’
‘Yeah?’ He tossed his gloves onto a couch and helped himself to a
schooner of Maxilla’s clawblood. ‘Who told Bure to build Glaw a body
without telling any of us? Who suddenly knows how to conjure daemons
like an expert? You cover your secrets with such an almighty righteous air
we all thank the stars and the Emperor Himself you chose us to help you in
your work. But you’re a liar! A conspirator! And maybe worse!’
‘And you’re too much a puritan idealist for your own good. And mine,’ I
hissed. ‘I dearly wanted your help, Godwyn. You are one of the few men I
really trust and one of the few humans in space with the stalwart spirit to
keep me on the level. I needed you now, in my fight to destroy Glaw. I can’t
believe you’re turning against me like this.’
He stared down at the contents of his glass. ‘I always did warn you I
would if you crossed the line.’
‘I’ve crossed no line. But if you feel that way... go. Get off this ship and
leave me to my work. You’ll always have my gratitude for the service you
put in. But I won’t have this bitterness.’
‘That’s what you think?’
‘Yes.’
He hesitated. ‘I gave my life to you, Gregor. I admired you. I always
believed you were... right.’
‘I still am. I serve the Emperor. Just like you. Get rid of your rancor and
we can work together again.’
‘Let me think about it.’
‘Two days, and we’re leaving orbit.’
‘Two days then.’
APPARENTLY, HIS RUMINATIONS only took him a day.
I had just received, via the Essene’s astropath bank, a rather fascinating
communiqué, and I went looked for Fischig. I found Crezia playing regicide
with Maxilla in a mid-deck suite. He’d taken quite a shine to Doctor
Berschilde.
She got up as I entered the room, and excitedly displayed the stunning
funz-silk gown she was wearing. ‘Tobias had his servitors make it for me!
Isn’t it gorgeous?’
‘It is,’ I agreed.
‘The poor woman had virtually no wardrobe at all, Gregor. Just a few
travel bags. It was the least I could do. You wait until you see the epinchire
dress they’re embroidering for her.’
‘Have you seen Fischig?’ I asked.
Crezia looked at Maxilla sharply and the ship master suddenly became
occupied with his study of the game board.
‘What?’ I asked.
Crezia took me by the arm and walked me over to the cabin windows.
‘He’s gone, Gregor.’
‘Gone?’
‘Early this morning. He left in his shuttle. Dreadful man.’
‘He was my friend, Crezia.’
‘Not any more, I think.’
‘Did he say anything?’
‘No. Not to me. Or to Tobias, except a quick goodbye. He was up late
last night though, talking to Medea and Aemos.’
‘About what?’
‘I don’t know. I wasn’t included. Tobias took Eleena and me on a guided
tour of his art collection. He has some extraordinary p—’
‘They talked and this morning he just left?’
‘I like Medea, but I think she may be a little careless. I’d never have told
that Fischig man about the things you did in New Gevae.’
‘And she did?’
‘I’m just saying. She might have.’
I HAD SERVITORS summon Aemos and Medea. They arrived in my
stateroom at about the same moment. Both of them looked awkward.
‘Well?’
‘Well what?’ snapped Medea.
‘What the hell did you say to him?’
She looked away. Aemos toyed with the hem of his cloak.
‘I simply tried to make him understand, Gregor. About what you were
doing... what you had done. I thought if he knew it all he might see it like I
see it.’
‘Really? It didn’t cross your mind he was a puritanical son of a bitch on a
hair trigger? Just like he’s always been?’
‘I felt honesty was the best policy,’ Aemos muttered. Medea said
something under her breath.
‘Oh, say it so we can all hear!’ I snarled.
‘Honesty is the best policy,’ Medea said. ‘I was appreciating the irony.’
‘How so?’
‘The stuff you never told us. The honesty you withheld.’
‘That’s rich coming from you, Medea Betancore. In point of fact, I
believe I told you everything. Shared everything. Sworn on my secrets.’
‘Yeah, well...’ she looked away.
‘Oh Throne, you told him, didn’t you? You told him about Cherubael and
the Codicium and Glaw and everything!’
She turned on me, tears in her anguished eyes. ‘I thought he would
understand if everything was out in the open...’
‘No wonder he left,’ I said, sitting down.
‘Medea was only doing the same as me,’ Aemos said. ‘We were
defending you to him, trying to make him understand and see things the
way we saw them. We thought—’
What?’
‘We thought he might change his mind and trust you again if he knew it
all.’
‘I thought you both had more sense,’ I said as I strode past them and out
of the room.
THERE WERE SEVERAL craft cradled in the Essene’s hangar. Two ferry
pods, a bulk pinnace, three standard shuttles and a number of small fliers.
I was busy directing the deck servitors to make a two man speeder flight
ready when Medea came in, red-eyed and dressed for the surface in a fleece
jacket.
‘I’ll fly you down,’ she said.
‘Don’t bother. You’ve done enough.’
‘It’s my job, Gregor! I’m your pilot!’
‘Forget about it.’
I clambered into the tight cockpit of the bright red speeder, pulled the
canopy shut and fired up the single, in-line thruster.
The launch chute opened and I shot away from the Essene at full throttle.
I TRACKED HIS flight path to Catharsis, the capital city of Hubris. Festival
flares and fireworks were spitting up above the slanted roofs of the vast
inland metropolis. The jubilee was in full swing. Once I had parked the
sprightly little flier at Catharsis downport, I found myself weaving through
a dense river of jumping, whooping people that clogged the winding streets.
All of them showed the grey pallor of recent cold-sleep. All of them were
drunk.
Bottles were pressed into my hands and young women and men alike
planted kisses on my face. I was jostled and shoved and scattered with
petals and confetti. The smell of the cryogenic chemicals sweating out of
them permeated the entire town.
It took all afternoon to find him. He was alone in an upstairs suite in a
crumbling but characterful hotel overlooking the Processional Tombs.
‘Get out,’ he said as I opened the door.
‘Godwyn...’
‘Get the hell out!’ he yelled, smashing a shot glass against the far wall.
He’d been drinking hard, which was unlike him, although everyone else on
Hubris except me must have been in the same state.
Fireworks coughed and whizzed in the square under his windows.
Fischig glowered at me for a long time, and then disappeared into the
suite’s bathroom. He emerged with two more shot glasses and a dish of ice.
I stood in the doorway and watched as he slowly and carefully prepared
two drinks. Anise, poured over smashed ice..
He placed one in front of himself and slid the other one towards the chair
opposite.
To me, that was an act of diplomacy.
I sat down facing him and lifted the glass.
‘To all we’ve been together,’ I said. We knocked back the shots.
I slid the glass back across the table top towards him and he made two
more.
He passed the second one back to me and caught my eyes for the first
time. I stared into his face, saw the eye-fogging scar that had already
marked him by the time we met, saw the faint mauve scar tissues where the
side of his face had been rebuilt after our clash with the saruthi on the
warped world orbiting KCX-1288.
‘I never meant to run out on you,’ he said.
‘I didn’t ever suppose so. When did Godwyn Fischig last run out on a
fight?’
He laughed bitterly. We sank the second drink and he fixed a third.
‘Whatever Medea told you. Whatever Aemos told you... it’s true. But it’s
not what you think.’
‘Yeah?’
‘I’m no heretic, Godwyn.’
‘No?’
‘I think I might have become what you’d call a radical. But I’m no
heretic.’
‘Isn’t that what a heretic would say?’
‘Yes. I guess so. If you’d let me into your mind, you’d see...’
‘No thanks!’ he shuddered, shoving his chair back with a squeak.
‘Okay,’ I sipped my glass. ‘It won’t be the same without you.’
‘I know. You and me. Bastards! The Eye of Terror itself was shy of us!’
‘Yes it was.’
‘We could do it again,’ he said.
‘We could?’
‘We could work side by side like old times and hunt out the darkness.’
‘Yes, we could. I’d like that.’
‘That’s why I’m sorry I ran out like that. I should have stayed.’
I nodded. ‘Yes.’
‘I owe you that much. I should have tried harder. You’re not gone. Not all
the way. You’re just slipping.’
‘Slipping?’
‘Into the pit. The radical pit. The pit no one comes back from. But I can
pull you out.’
‘Pull me out?’
‘Yes. It’s not too late.’
‘Too late for what, Godwyn?’
‘Salvation,’ he said.
The crowds outside were screaming and clapping. Barrages of fireworks
were being launched into the early evening air, scattering new stars in their
wake like fireflies.
‘What does “salvation” mean?’ I asked.
‘It’s why I’m here, why the Emperor put me at your side. To keep you
centred. It’s destiny.’
‘Is it? And what does destiny entail?’
‘Renounce it all. All of it. Give over the Malus Codicium to me... the
daemonhost, your runestaff. Let me take you back to the ordos headquarters
on Thracian. You can do penance there. I’ll plead for you, plead for
leniency. They wouldn’t be too hard on you. You’d be active again before
too long.’
‘You actually believe that you could take me back to the ordos, tell them
what I’ve done, and they’d let me practise again?’
‘They’d understand!’
‘Fischig, you don’t understand!’
He looked at me, disappointed. ‘You won’t then?’
‘I think this is where I say goodbye. I admire your efforts, but I can’t be
saved, Godwyn.’
‘You can!’
‘No,’ I shook my head. ‘You know why? I don’t need saving.’
‘Then this is where I say goodbye too,’ he said, pouring another drink.
‘Remember what we did,’ I said.
‘Yes.’
I shut the door behind me and left.
IT TOOK ME three hours to get back to the landing field through the solid
mob of revellers. I powered the quick-heeled red speeder back up to the
Essene.
They were all waiting for me in the hangar as I docked. Maxilla. Crezia.
Eleena. Aemos. Medea.
I tugged the rumpled copy of the astropathic communiqué I had received
earlier out of my pocket and tossed it at Maxilla. ‘We’re breaking orbit.
New destination: Promody.’
‘What about Fischig?’ asked Eleena.
‘He isn’t coming.’
THERE IS A move in Carthean blade work called the teht uin sah. The
phrase literally describes a position of the feet, but the philosophy is deeper.
It means the moment in a duel when you gain the advantage and begin to
win home. It is the turning point, the little fulcrum on which a life or death
fight turns. The moment your fortunes change and you realise victory can
be yours if you rally hard enough.
I felt that the astropathic communiqué from Promody was the equivalent
of the teht uin sah. It had been sent to me, uncoded, by a trusted friend I
hadn’t seen in a long time.
It read simply ‘Khanjar must be stopped’.
IT TOOK THE Essene ten weeks to reach Promody, a jungle world on the
trailing hem of the Scarus sector, specifically the Antimar sub-sector.
I went planetside alone, using the little red speeder, in case it turned out
to be a trap.
They were waiting for me on a tropical hillside, below a break of pink-
lobed punz trees. The evening was warm and fragrant. Insects fidgeted in
the gathering dark. The air was humid.
I got out of the steaming speeder.
My old pupil, Gideon Ravenor, sustained by his force chair, rolled
forward across the mossy ground to greet me. To his left, he was flanked by
Kara Swole. To his right, Harlon Nayl.
SIXTEEN
Surviving Messina.
Gideon’s omen.
Nothing lasts forever.
HARLON GAVE ME a great bearhug and Kara timidly kissed my cheek on
tiptoe. I gazed at them both, hardly believing it.
‘You have a habit of coming back from the dead,’ I said to Harlon. ‘I’m
just glad it’s real this time.’
He frowned. ‘What do you mean?’
‘I’ll explain later. I refuse to explain anything more until you tell me how
this is possible.’
‘Why don’t we go inside?’ Ravenor suggested. He led us back up the
path through the punz trees and across glades where the light was stained
gold by the fleshy orange leaves that formed the canopy. Brilliantly
feathered lizards flitted from branch to branch and diaphanous insects the
size of man’s open palm fluttered like seedcases in the humid breeze.
Ravenor’s force chair hissed over the ground a few centimetres in the air,
surrounded and suspended by a spherical field generated by the slowly
revolving and tilting antigravity hoop that encircled it.
Beyond the wooded slope, the ground was flooded. A vast lake of yellow
liquid stretched out under the jungle canopy that sprouted up from the water
in lurid clumps. Fronds, rushes and fibrously rooted trees formed hammock
islets in the lake, along with batteries of puffy mauve or orange zutaes with
giant leaves and tangles of saprophitic vines.
Antigrav walkboards bridged out across the resinous water, linking the
dryland to Ravenor’s camp by way of several of the hammocks.
The camp had been raised on a duralloy raft twenty metres square, held
above the water by locked, cycling repulsor lift-pods. Angular, geometric,
the structure the raft supported looked like a large tent, but I realised from
its gentle shimmer that it was formed from intersecting fields of opaque
force energy.
We went in through the one-way field membrane that formed the door
and entered a cool, climate-controlled chamber lit by glow-globes.
Equipment was stacked up in metal containers and there were several items
of collapsible furniture. Further screens denoted adjoining rooms, veiled
off. A grey-haired man in a linen robe was working at a small camp table,
reviewing data on a portable codifier.
Kara unfolded three more of the stacked camp chairs while Harlon
fetched bottles of chilled fruit-water and some shrink-wrapped ration packs.
A young woman came in from one of the other rooms and conferred quietly
with the man at the codifier.
‘You’re busy here, I see?’ I said.
‘Yes,’ said Ravenor. ‘The view should be good.’
I didn’t quite understand what he meant but I let it pass. There were other
things on my mind.
Harlon thumb-popped the cap of a bottle and passed it to me before
taking his seat.
‘Here’s to us all, still alive despite the odds.’ He clinked his bottle against
mine and Kara toasted with hers.
‘Well?’ I said.
‘A bunch of hard-arse merc bastards smoked the Distaff. Took the whole
spire out. Killed the lot of them,’ Harlon said, matter of factly, but there was
still an edge of rage in his voice.
‘And you?’
‘Madam Bequin saved us,’ said Kara.
‘What?’
‘We got her back to Messina okay, stable,’ said Kara. ‘The medicae
facility at the Distaff hall made her comfortable. They got me back on my
feet in about a week. Then Madam Bequin suddenly took a turn for the
worse.’
‘She stroked out,’ growled Harlon. ‘A really bad whassit called—’
‘Cerebrovascular ischemia,’ Ravenor said quietly.
‘It was beyond the abilities or resources of the hall’s medicae, so we
rushed her to Sandus Sedar Municipal General for surgery,’ said Kara. ‘We
knew you wouldn’t want us to leave her there alone, so we stayed with her
in shifts. I took one watch, and alternated with Nayl. On the night the hall
was raided, I had just started my shift.’
‘And I was on my way back to spire eleven in an air cab,’ finished
Harlon.
‘So neither of you were there?’
‘No.’
‘You two... and Alizebeth... all survived?’
‘Lucky us, eh?’ said Harlon.
‘Where is she?’ I asked. And how is she?’
‘Never regained consciousness. She’s on vital support in my ship’s
infirmary,’ Ravenor replied. ‘My personal physician is tending her.’ I knew
Doctor Antribus, Gideon’s medicae. Bequin couldn’t be in more
experienced hands.
I looked back at Harlon and Kara. I could tell the Loki-born ex-bounty
hunter was enjoying stringing this tale out. He’d probably been rehearsing it
for weeks.
‘So... go on.’
‘We went to ground. Me and Kara. We couldn’t move Madam B, so we
signed her in under a fake identity so she couldn’t be linked to your
operation. Then me and Kara went hunting. We caught up with the hit
squad at a shanty town lift-port down in the suburbs. Thirty of them.
Vessorine janissaries, no less. Never tangled with those brothers before,
though I’d heard of them, of course. Now, could they fight like bastards.’
‘I’ve seen them up close.’
‘Then you’ll appreciate that two against thirty, even with the drop to us,
was hard ball. I smoked three of them—’
‘Two,’ corrected Kara. ‘It was two.’
‘Okay, two definites and a probable. Kara, may the Emperor bless her,
took out six of the pigs. Blam blam blam!’
‘We can split a bottle of amasec while you give me a play by play later,
Nayl. Stick to the meat.’
‘My family motto, chief,’ Harlon grinned. ‘Well, as it turned out, me and
Kara had probably bitten off a sight more than we could chew, and we
ended up cornered in a freight yard next to the lift-port. Backs to the wall
time. Last stand. A change of underwear moment. And then, just like that,’
he clicked his fingers, ‘salvation arrived,’ He looked over at Inquisitor
Ravenor.
‘Just glad I was able to help,’ Ravenor demurred.
‘Help? Him and his kill team kicked arse! Far as I could tell, only eight
of the mercs got out alive. Jumped their ship and ran off-world.’
I set my empty bottle down on the duralloy floor and sat forward with my
elbows on my knees. ‘So, Gideon,’ I said, ‘how in the name of Terra did
you come to be there on Messina at the right time?’
‘I wasn’t,’ he said. ‘I was there at the wrong time. If I’d reached Messina
a day earlier, I’d have been there at the right time. But my ship was delayed
by a warp storm that also shut down my communications.’
‘That’s the second time since I arrived you’ve been enigmatic,’ I said. ‘Is
that any way to treat your old master?’
Gideon Ravenor had been my interrogator and pupil back in the late
330s, the most promising Inquisitorial candidate I have ever met. A level
delta latent psyker with a RQ of 171, he had also possessed a genius
intellect rounded out with a fine education, and an athlete’s physique.
During the Holy Novena on Thracian Primaris, he had been caught up in
the infamous Atrocity and his body had been woefully crippled. Since that
time, he had lived within the cocoon of his force chair, a brilliant mind
sustained within a paralysed, useless frame.
But that had not stopped him from becoming one of the Inquisition’s
finest agents. I myself had sponsored his promotion to full inquisitor status
in 346. Since then he had successfully prosecuted hundreds of cases, the
most notable being the Gomek Violation and, of course, the Cervan-
Holman Affair on Sarum. He had also penned several works of considerable
insight: the celebrated essays Towards an Imperial Utopia, Reflections on
the Hive State and Terra Redux: A History of the early Inquisition, a study
of warp craft that was fast becoming a standard primer, and a work called
The Mirror of Smoke that dealt with man’s interaction with the warp-state
with such conspicuous perception and poetry that I believed it would
survive as much as art as it was instruction.
Ravenor was all but invisible within the dim globe of his chair’s field,
just a shapeless shadow suspended in the fizzling gloom. His body was
utterly redundant and everything he did was performed by psi-force alone.
His mind had grown stronger in his infirmity, compensating for the things
denied him. I was sure he was now much more than a level delta psionic.
‘My work in the last few years has required me to develop an
understanding of divination and prophesy,’ Gideon said slowly. ‘Things
have been... revealed to me. Things of great significance.’
I could tell he was being very careful about what he said. It was as if he
wished to tell me more but didn’t dare. I decided I should respect his
caution, and allow him to tell me only what he felt he could.
‘One of those revelations – a vision, if you like – forecast that a violent
fate would befall the Distaff on Messina. The event was predicted to the
precise hour. But I couldn’t get there in time to prevent it.’
‘The destruction of the Distaff was predicted?’ I said.
‘With distressing accuracy,’ he replied.
I suddenly realised I was hearing his voice, by which I mean the voice
Ravenor had used before his terrible injuries, a voice produced by a man
whose mouth and larynx had not been melted by burning promethium. I had
become so used to the monotone synthetic speech of his chair’s psi-
activated voxsponder.
‘My work has also allowed me perfect stronger psionic abilities,’ he said,
and one of them was clearly reading my surface thoughts. ‘I ditched the
voxsponder about a year ago. I have developed enough psionic control to
broadcast my speech naturally.’
‘I’m hearing you in my head?’
‘Yes, Gregor. Hearing the voice you’re used to. It doesn’t work with
untouchables or psychically shielded individuals of course – THAT’S WHY
I KEEP THE OLD VOXSPONDER ON STANDBY.’
He uttered the last part of his sentence mechanically via the toneless
voice box built into his chair and the grating, emotion-free electronic words
made us all laugh with surprise.
‘Though I was too late to save the Distaff, I got Kara, Harlon and
Alizebeth to safety off-world.’
‘For that, you have my gratitude. But why summon me so far off the
beaten track to meet with you?’
‘Promody has secrets that we need,’ he said.
‘What manner of secrets?’
‘I have been allowed to see the future, Gregor,’ Ravenor said. ‘And it
isn’t pretty.’
‘IMPERIAL CULTURE HAS never set much store by divination,’ Gideon told
me. ‘I have come to suspect that is a great weakness.’
It was much later. Night had fallen over the swampy bayou and the air
was dancing with bioluminescent flies. Ravenor and I had taken a stroll
along the grav walks behind his camp.
‘A weakness? Surely it is a greater weakness to take it seriously? If we
believed the rantings of every dribbling marketplace seer, of every
demented Ecclesiarchy prophet who claimed to have been granted divine
revelations—’
‘We would be mad, true. Most of it is rubbish, lies, mischief, the
delusions of broken minds. Sometimes prophetic insights are genuine, but
they are usually made by psykers who have either done it by accident or
who are insane. In either case, the visions are untrustworthy or too confused
to be interpreted in any practical, useful way. But just because mankind
isn’t very good at it doesn’t mean it can’t be done.’
‘It is my understanding that other races are reputed to excel at it,’ I said.
‘That has certainly been my experience,’ he replied. ‘Serving the Ordo
Xenos has been enlightening. The more I have studied alien races in order
to discern their weaknesses, the more I have learned their strengths.’
‘We are talking about the eldar, aren’t we?’ I risked the question. He
didn’t reply immediately. His last words had been close to heresy. The force
sphere around him flickered slightly with anxiety.
‘They are a strange breed. They are able to read the invisible geography
of space-time and unravel probability with great precision. But they are
mercurial. Sometimes they use their insight as a lever to change the
outcome of events. Sometimes they stand idle and watch as prophesies play
out. I believe there is no human alive who could explain why they make the
choices they do. We just don’t see things the way they do.’
‘Their greater lifespan gives them greater perspective...’
‘It’s partly that. Although orthodox thinking would say that greater
perspective is their curse. The Ministorum believes the eldar are too
resigned to destiny. That they are indolent and almost cruel, or else brutally
manipulative.’
‘You don’t think so?’
‘I’ll admit only a selfish fascination, Gregor. They interact with the
fundamental structure of the universe. As you might well appreciate, any
talent for living or perceiving beyond one’s physical body is attractive to
me. My work has—’
He broke off.
‘Gideon?’
‘I wanted to learn something of the way their minds witness reality
independent of their bodies. Their farseers, for example, have a kinaesthetic
sensibility that operates regardless of the restraints of time and space—’
We paused at the edge of a walkway and looked out across the misty
nocturnal swamp. Glowing insects and airborne spores drifted in the air,
their paths occasionally punctuated by the sudden swoops of aerial night
hunters. Sinuous things moved through the glistening water below the
floating walkways, barely disturbing the oily surface.
‘I’ve said too much,’ he murmured.
‘You do not need to be guarded with me, Gideon. I will not judge you for
seeking knowledge. I’m... not the puritan you once knew.’
‘I know. I would tell you if I could. But in order to learn certain things, I
have been forced to make promises.’
‘To the eldar?’
‘I cannot even confirm that. I am not proud of the promises, but I will
honour them.’
‘Then what can you tell me? You said that things had been revealed to
you.’
‘One of their kind has foreseen a great darkness ahead of us all. It is so
abrupt and acute that it has twisted and altered the skeins of probability that
the eldar read. It was revealed to him in a sequence of connected visions.
One of those was the destruction of the Distaff. When that came true, I was
shaken. It proved the visions were not fanciful.’
‘What else has he seen?’ I asked.
‘A living blade, a man-machine, bestriding a long-dead world and
preparing to strike a blow that will spill human and eldar blood alike,’ he
said. ‘After that... nothing.’
I looked down at him. ‘Nothing?’
‘Nothing. That vision is the most distant thing he is now able to see. It’s
no more than six months from now. Beyond that, he has been unable to
glimpse anything at all.’
‘Why?’
‘Because there is no future left to see.’
SEVENTEEN
Psychoarchaeology.
Ghul.
The Barque of the Daemon.
GIDEON’S MESSAGE TO me proved that he already knew the name Khanjar
the Sharp, but as we talked, I discovered he knew very little besides the
name.
‘Nayl and I tracked the janissaries after they fled Messina in an effort to
discover who had hired them. It was well hidden. The Vessorine take great
pains to protect the identity of their clients. There were false trails,
payments from bogus accounts and via holding companies. But we wormed
it out eventually. Khanjar the Sharp.’
‘Which meant what to you?’
‘Nothing... except that he was the individual who had ordered the
systematic destruction of your operation... and that his name featured
prominently in a number of the farseer’s visions. We believe Khanjar and
the man-machine from the climactic revelation are one and the same.’
‘Khanjar the Sharp is Pontius Glaw,’ I said.
He was astonished and excited. The revelations had said nothing of Glaw.
The Khanjar guise had masked his true identity from the eldar.
‘Why target you?’ he asked.
‘Self-preservation. I am one of the few people who knows he still exists.
In fact, I’m sorry to say, he exists because of me. He was also searching for
something that he believes I possess.’
‘Like what?’
I had no choice but to tell him everything. My dealings with Glaw, Maria
Tarray, the Malus Codicium...
‘You weren’t joking when you said you weren’t the puritan I once knew,’
he said.
‘Are you shocked?’
‘No, Gregor, I’m not. I believe radicalism is inevitable. We all become
radicals eventually as we appreciate that we must know our enemy in order
to defeat him. The real dangers come from extreme puritans. Puritanism is
fuelled by ignorance, and ignorance is the greatest peril of all. That’s not to
suggest the path of the radical is easy. Eventually even the most careful and
responsible radical will be overwhelmed by the warp. The real judge of
character is what good a man can do for the Imperium before he is drawn
too far.’
‘There is one other thing. In the mind of his daughter there was an image
of a desiccated world that closely matches the one you describe from the
eldar revelations. There was a name connected with it: Ghul.’
‘Let me investigate that further,’ he said, and turned his force chair back
down the walkway towards the camp.
RAVENOR HAD BROUGHT me to that remote jungle world because Promody
had featured in another of the eldar visions. Khanjar the Sharp had been
there recently, perhaps as little as six weeks before. Ravenor intended to
find out why.
Ravenor’s field team numbered about ten individuals – several
technicians, six astropaths and an archaeologist called Kenzer, the grey-
haired man I had seen earlier.
‘But there are no ruins on Promody,’ I remarked shortly after I had been
introduced to him.
‘Not any more, sir,’ he agreed. ‘But there is compelling theory that
Promody was once one of several worlds inhabited by an ancient culture.’
‘How ancient?’
He glanced at me nervously. ‘Pre-Dawn,’ he said.
A culture from before the rise of Man. That was breathtaking.
‘So this compelling theory,’ I pressed, ‘this comes from the eldar?’
He didn’t want to answer but my rank gave him little option.
‘Yes, sir. But this culture predates even them. And was quite dead long
before even they came to the stars.’
RAVENOR’S TECHNICIANS HAD spent their time since reaching Promody
conducting a survey with the assistance of the astropaths. They had studied
the surface and atmosphere of the planet for signs of Khanjar’s visit,
looking for traces of landing sites, the residual pollution of vehicle
exhausts, the echoes of human minds. They were certain now that the
campsite on the bayou was close to the place where Khanjar made
planetfall. Now the astropaths were preparing for an auto-séance on a scale
greater than any I had ever attempted.
GIDEON CALLED ME to the force tent.
‘Ghul is the name of a planet,’ he said.
‘The dead world in the vision?’
‘Quite probably.’
‘And where is it?’
‘We don’t know.’
‘Who’s we? Where did this information come from?’
He sighed. ‘Lord seer?’ he called.
One of the inner screens drew aside and a slim, very tall figure in a long,
hooded robe stepped through from the privacy of the inner rooms. The robe
was made of a gleaming blue material that flashed like shot-silk but seemed
heavier and more fluid. There was a strange, unpleasantly sweet scent, like
burnt sugar. I knew that hood would never be drawn back in my presence. I
was not fit to see the face beneath.
‘This is Eisenhorn,’ the figure said. It wasn’t a question. The words
flowed melodically with a strange cadence that no human could ever
approximate.
‘Who am I addressing?’ I said.
‘The book is in his coat,’ the figure said to Ravenor, ignoring me. ‘An
insult that he carries it so casually.’
‘Gregor?’
I took the Malus Codicium from my pocket. The figure made a warding
gesture with its gloved right hand.
‘It’s an insult that your friend will have to tolerate, I’m afraid,’ I said.
‘This isn’t leaving my person.’
‘It has contaminated him. It smoulders in his blood. It has yoked him to
daemons.’
‘And more besides, no doubt,’ I countered. ‘But take one look into my
mind and tell me I’m not dedicated to the salvation of all of us.’
I dropped my psi-shield provocatively, but though I could sense the
eldar’s temptation to look, he did not touch my mind.
‘Ravenor vouches for you,’ the hooded figure said after a moment. ‘I will
content myself with that. But do not come any closer.’
‘So what do I call you?’
‘You won’t have any need to,’ the eldar replied bluntly.
‘Please,’ Gideon cut in. He was clearly very uncomfortable. ‘Gregor, you
may refer to my guest as “lord seer”. My lord, perhaps you could tell
Gregor about Ghul?’
‘In the First Days, a race came from the maelstrom and raised settlements
in this space. Seven worlds they made, and the greatest of these was Ghul.
Then they were overturned and left no trace behind.’
‘From the maelstrom? From the warp? You mean a daemon race?’
The lord seer said nothing.
‘Are you saying daemons once colonised seven worlds in our reality?’
‘They fled a war. Their king was dead and they carried his body for
burial. On his tomb they raised the first city, and then made six worlds
around it to honour his rest forever.’
‘Ghul is the tomb of a daemon king?’
There was no response.
‘What? Are you just going to answer every other question? Is Ghul the
tomb-world? Is that what Glaw is after? The tomb of a daemon?’
‘I have not seen the answer,’ said the eldar.
‘Then take a wild guess!’
‘The daemon king is dead. Khanjar cannot hope to raise him.’
‘Unless he has the Malus Codicium,’ I said.
‘Not even then.’
‘So what, then?’ I snapped.
‘Traditionally,’ Gideon put in, ‘in human culture, anyway, a king is
buried with great treasures and artefacts beside him.’
‘So there’s something in this tomb. Something so valuable that the Malus
Codicium is just a key to get it. Where is Ghul?’
‘We don’t know,’ said Ravenor.
‘Does Glaw know?’
‘I think that’s why he was here.’
THE ELDAR WITHDREW and I was glad to be out of his presence. I found it
hard to know how Ravenor tolerated him.
Outside, the final preparations were being made. All of Ravenor’s people
except Kenzer and the six astropaths were withdrawing to his ship. Nayl
and Kara were going to the Essene.
‘A message from Maxilla,’ Nayl said to me. ‘You’ve had a communiqué
from Fischig.’
‘Fischig? Really?’
‘It seems he’s changed his mind. That he regrets his clash with you and
wants to come back.’
‘I think it’s too late for that, Harlon.’
Nayl shrugged. ‘Cut him some slack, I say, boss. You know how hardline
he is. He’s had time to think about things. Get his head around stuff. Let
him come back. From what Gideon’s been saying, we could probably use
him.’
‘No. Later maybe. Not now. I don’t think I can trust him.’
‘He probably thinks the same thing about you,’ grinned Nayl. ‘Joke!’ he
added, raising his hands to pacify me. ‘Good luck,’ he finished, then walked
off to the shuttle where Kara Swole was waiting.
IT WAS JUST dawn. Before their departure, the technicians had extended
the antigrav walkways to form a circular path across the bayou fifty metres
in diameter. The astropaths spread out around the suspended walkways
under the thick, steaming vegetation. I stood with Gideon and Kenzer on
one of the central sections. The evenly spaced astropaths began to murmur
as they sank into their trances and the air became charged with psypathic
energy. Instead of focusing on a single object, as Jekud Vance and I had
done with Midas’s jacket, the astropaths were opening the entire area up,
conjuring its psychic traces. A cold, blue glow began to spread around us,
quite at odds with the light of the rising sun. Things became filmy and
misty.
‘I see something...’ Kenzer said.
So did I. Shapes, like clouds, writhing and forming above the water at the
centre of the circle. Nothing distinct.
I felt Ravenor reach out with his mind and fine tune the coherence of the
image. Just standing there beside him, I could feel how strong his mind had
grown. My old pupil was frighteningly powerful.
Suddenly the image resolved. Three figures, wading through the bayou’s
knee-deep water. One, a massive ogryn with a blaster cannon, followed in
the splashing wake of a sturdy male human dressed in beige combat armour,
his face hidden by a rebreather. This human was scanning the area with a
hand-held auspex. The third figure was beside him. It was tall, broad, and
moved with a strange stiffness, its body partially draped with what looked
at first like a cape of feathers.
They weren’t feathers. They were blades. Tongues of polished, sharpened
metal interlaced into an armoured garment. Beneath it, I could glimpse a
body of burnished chrome, duralloy and steel, a mechanical humanoid body
of marvellous design.
The work of Magos Geard Bure, I had no doubt. The late Geard Bure.
This is was Khanjar the Sharp. The man-machine... the ‘living blade’
from the eldar vision. Pontius Glaw.
I could see his face. It was the face of a beautiful young man with a mane
of curled hair, but the hair didn’t move and the expression didn’t alter from
a curling smirk. It was a mask worked from gold, like the head of a noble
gilded statue. I had seen the face before, in old records that showed Pontius
Glaw in his prime.
There was no sound, but Glaw said something to his point man. Then he
turned and seemed to address someone or something we couldn’t see.
There was a long pause as they waited and then the ogryn shuffled back,
as if alarmed by something. The point man set his auspex to close focus.
Glaw stood still as if awestruck for a moment, then clapped his metal hands
in delight.
‘I can’t see what they’re doing...’ Kenzer said.
‘There’s nothing there to see,’ Gideon snapped in disappointment. That
seemed to be the case. There was a faint visual distortion where the psychic
ghost of the location failed to match its real counterpart exactly. But nothing
else.
‘No,’ I said suddenly. ‘I think there is. Get your astropaths to widen the
field of the séance.’
‘What?’ Gideon asked.
‘Just do it.’
With a little effort, Ravenor’s telepaths managed to increase the diameter
of the conjured scene. Almost at once, were able to make out shadowy
figures lurking around the edge.
‘Psykers!’ said Gideon.
‘Exactly,’ I said. ‘The reason we can’t see what he’s up to is because he
did what we’re doing!’
‘An auto-séance.’
‘That’s right.’
‘How did you guess, Gregor?’
‘Mr Kenzer here said there were no ancient remains on Promody. Glaw
has to be looking for the past by other means.’
‘But we can’t resolve what it is he’s seeing.
‘Go back,’ said a voice behind us. Silently, the eldar seer had joined us
on the walkway.
‘Go back,’ he said again.
It took a few minutes for the astropaths to compose themselves and re-
establish the image. Now I could feel the eldar’s mental strength supporting
them.
We watched as the scene replayed. The three figures approached us just
as before. Glaw conversed with his point man and then called back to his
psykers.
The world changed.
There was no jungle. No water. Great, smooth cliffs of rock blocked out
the sky. Stone columns like giant fir trees towered over us. We were seeing
what Glaw’s psykers had allowed him to see. The surface of Promody as it
had been eons before the age of man. A cyclopean city of glassy black rock
that had long since vanished so completely only its psychic phantom
remained.
‘God-Emperor!’ Kenzer gasped and collapsed in a faint. It was terrifying.
Mesmeric. The scale was so big. We felt like microbes or motes of dust on
the streets of an Imperial hive.
I stared, fascinated. Now when the ogryn shuffled back in fear and Glaw
stood awestruck, I could see why. Glaw dapped his hands in delight and the
point man began scanning a wide section of the ghostly wall with his
auspex.
‘There’s an inscription!’ Ravenor cried.
I leapt off the walkway and waded through the oily water until I was
beside the images of Glaw and his men. ‘We need to get this before it
fades!’ I shouted. Ravenor flew his chair in over the water to join me.
Recording sensors in his chair began to whir and store the images.
They were written in a language I had never seen before. It made me sick
to look at it. There was no linear form. It simply spiralled and meandered
up across the massive wall face, looping and circling.
I felt dizzy. Glaw was capering and dancing like a lunatic, his machine
body lurching and awkward.
The light around us began to wink and flicker.
‘We’re losing it,’ said Ravenor.
‘Probably time we did...’ I said, stumbling back towards the walkway.
The colossal city melted away. Then Glaw and his companions vanished
and blue light ebbed away.
Ravenor’s telepaths were slumped on the walkways, exhausted. The eldar
stood, head bowed.
‘It looked like a chart.’
‘It was a chart,’ said the eldar. ‘A plan of the seven worlds. And on it was
the location of Ghul.’
Pontius Glaw knew where he was going. He’d known for some weeks.
He might already have arrived.
IT TOOK RAVENOR and the lord seer about a day to make sense of the
findings. Allowing for procession and sidereal shifts as best they could
considering the vast passage of time involved, they determined that the
world known before the time of man as Ghul was in an uncharted system
designated 5213X, three months outside Imperial space and twenty weeks
from our current location.
We made preparation to break orbit the following night. Ravenor
explained to me that the eldar had requested to be taken to a secret location
en route, where he could access something called a warp tunnel. Ravenor
was beholden to him.
We agreed to rendezvous at Jeganda, three weeks short of 5213X, prior to
the final leg of our chase.
‘Do we inform the ordos?’ Ravenor asked.
‘No. What strength they could lend us would be outweighed by problems
they’d cause. I will prepare a full documented account of everything we
know to be transmitted back in the event that we...’
‘We?’
‘Fail,’ I finished.
BEFORE WE DEPARTED, I dared to visit Ravenor’s ship, the Hinterlight. I
took Crezia and Harlon Nayl with me. Medicae Antribus showed us to the
low-lit chamber off the starship’s infirmary where Alizebeth lay inside a
softly glowing stasis field.
Crezia and Harlon hung back by the hatchway.
Alizebeth looked like she was asleep. Her skin was as pale as the snows
of the high Atenates.
‘Is she alive?’ I asked Antribus.
‘Yes, sir.’
‘I mean... without these vital supports, the stasis field—?’
‘If we shut them down, she may remain the way she is. But she might
also fade. It is never easy to tell in cases of such significant injury.’
‘Will she recover?’ I asked.
‘No,’ he said, caring enough to look me in the eyes. ‘Except for some
miracle. She will never regain consciousness or mobility.’
‘So she’s dead to us? Has she any quality of life?’
‘Who can say, sir? She’s not in any pain. I believe she is dreaming an
endless, tranquil dream. If you consider that to be cruel, we can disconnect
the machines and let nature take its course.’
He withdrew. Crezia appeared at my side.
‘What are you going to do, Gregor?’ she asked.
‘I won’t turn the machines off. Not yet. My mind’s too full of that bastard
Glaw. I’ll make a decision afterwards.’ If there is afterwards, I thought. ‘I’d
like you and Nayl to stay with her. Look after her. Will you do that?’
‘Of course,’ she said. I realised this was the first time she’d ever set eyes
on Alizebeth Bequin.
‘Really? It’s a big thing to ask of you.’
‘I’m a doctor, and your friend, Gregor. It’s not a big thing.’
I turned to go.
‘She can probably hear you,’ she said suddenly.
‘Do you think so?’
Crezia shrugged and smiled. ‘I don’t know. There’s every chance she can.
And if she can’t, does it matter?’
‘Does what matter?’
‘Tell her, Gregor. Now, before you go. Tell her, for goodness sake. Do the
right thing by one of us at least.’
She left me alone and I sat down beside Alizebeth’s cot.
And then, though I don’t know to this day if she ever heard or
understood, I told her all the things I should have told her years before.
I SAID GOODBYE to Ravenor and promised to wait for him at Jeganda. I
kissed Crezia goodbye and went to the Hinterlight’s hangar to cross back to
the Essene. Nayl came to see me off.
I shook his hand. ‘Keep an eye on Gideon,’ I said.
He frowned. ‘You don’t trust him?’ he asked.
‘With my life. But I don’t trust his friends.’
AS THE ESSENE pulled away from Promody, gathering speed as it headed
for the immaterium translation point Maxilla’s navigator had calculated, I
went to find Aemos.
He was in his suite of rooms, puzzling his way through a deep stack of
books he’d borrowed from Maxilla’s library.
‘Something else to divert you,’ I said, handing him a pile of data-slates
and record tiles. Before we had parted company, Ravenor had copied for me
everything he had been permitted to copy, including a pict-file of the
inscription as his force chair’s sensors had recorded it.
‘Gideon has marked some key passages in his notes to get you up to
speed, but the inscription, which is a chart, is what really interests me.
Gideon’s... associate... told me what it means, or the part of it that applies to
Ghul, anyway. I’d like to know a little more, in literal terms.’
‘You want me to decipher an alien text that was long dead before man
appeared?’
Put like that it was a tall order. ‘There are some other samples of the
same script that Ravenor obtained from other sites. I don’t know. Do what
you can with it. Anything you can turn up will be useful.’
THE VOYAGE TO Jeganda was not the longest I have ever undertaken, but
it felt like it. I was fretful and ill at ease, impatient to arrive. My mind
would not stop thinking about Glaw’s head start, or how close the farseer’s
nothingness loomed.
To fill the time, I meditated and exercised, burrowed my way through
Maxilla’s library in search of anything pertaining to the eldar and their
legends. Kara worked to get Medea up to fitness and, after two weeks, the
three of us were running through demanding combat training each day.
Sometimes Eleena joined us for the lighter sessions to keep in shape. I was
glad I had an untouchable with me, given our destination and Glaw’s
abilities.
Except for Alizebeth, who didn’t really count under the circumstances,
Eleena was the last living member of the Distaff. I wondered if I would ever
recruit and build it again.
I wondered if I would even get the chance.
DURING THE THIRD week, Aemos called me to his suite to discuss his
findings so far. I wondered why he hadn’t simply told me over dinner. We
all met for a meal each evening anyway.
He told me he was making progress. The ancient culture which had built
Ghul appeared indirectly in several old sources. It seems that early Imperial
explorers had known myths of a dead, precursor race from some of their
first contacts with xenos species, though Aemos was concerned that some
of the references could be to other dead cultures, or to species that had
migrated or transplanted themselves.
One theme emerged. The race of Ghul were marked as ‘others’ or
‘outsiders’ because they had not originated in our galaxy. The name ‘Ghul’
itself didn’t appear anywhere.
‘One minor culture, the Doy of Mitas, have a legend concerning the “xol-
xonxoy”, daemons who ruled once and would return. The word meant
“warped ones”.’
‘A good enough description as any. The eldar seemed convinced that the
culture was a colony of daemons from the warp. Not even a race in its own
right, more a host, an army... a nation. An exiled daemon-king and his
followers, perhaps.’
‘There are a few more bits and pieces, not much. I’m getting nowhere
with the inscription, though it is extraordinary, and Gideon’s footage of that
séance most perturbatory. I’d like to borrow your book.’
‘You what?’
‘Your damned book. I use the adjective advisedly.’
‘You said you never wanted to see it again,’ I reminded him.
‘I don’t, Gregor. It chills me to know it is even on board. But what chills
me more is what we’re going out there to find. And you’ve asked me to do
a job. And that’s the only tool available to me that I haven’t used.’
I took the Malus Codicium from my pocket. For a moment I couldn’t
bring myself to pass it to him.
‘Be careful,’ I hissed.
‘I know the procedures,’ he said grumpily. ‘You’ve had me study
prohibited texts before.’ ‘Not like this one.’
I KEPT AN eye on Aemos after that, visiting him regularly and making
sure he came to meals. He became tired and short-tempered. I wanted to
take the book away from him, but he said he was nearly done.
We were a week from Jeganda when he finished his work.
‘It’s incomplete,’ he warned, ‘but the main elements are there.’
He seemed even more fatigued than before and had developed a slight
shake on his left side. His suite was a mess of papers and slates, notes and
scrawlings, scattered books. In places, where he had apparently run out of
paper, he had continued his notes on tabletops or even walls.
Uber Aemos had performed his greatest work of service for me, the
hardest task I had ever set him. And it had cost him. It had damaged his
health and, I was afraid, his sanity.
‘The daemon-king,’ he said, spreading out a large sheet of scribbled-on
vellum across the litter on his desk, ‘who is represented by this glyph
here...’ he pointed with a palsied finger, ‘...and by this triple formation of
symbols here was called Y-Y-Y—’
‘Aemos?’
‘Yssarile!’ He all but had to spit the word out of his mouth to make the
sound. The gilded clock on the table beside his unmade bed chimed twice
suddenly for no reason.
‘It keeps doing that,’ Aemos growled crossly. His finger stabbed another
mark on the paper for me to look at and then traced down a curling line of
script. His notes, I realised, had taken the form of the chart itself. ‘Here,
look. There was a war. The daemon-king Y-Y—’
‘Just call him the daemon-king.’
‘The daemon-king fought a war of staggering enmity with a rival. The
rival’s name is not given, but from the marking here, I would guess it was
one of what we tentatively understand to be the four primary powers of
Chaos, although it seems there were only three at that time. I wonder why?’
I couldn’t answer that. I wondered if the farseer could.
‘The rival is described as a foul sorcerer,’ Aemos continued. ‘I don’t
pretend or want to know the hierarchies of the warp, but in simple terms, Y-
Y-damnit! Yssarile! was a lieutenant, a warlord, a prince... whatever you
want to call it, who tried to usurp the place of this primary power.’
Aemos unrolled another crumpled sheet and wiped pencil shavings off it.
‘The war lasted... a billion years. As we would understand it. The daemon-
king was destroyed by his rival. Killed outright. His host fled in terror at
this crashing defeat, and sought sanctuary in the material universe. Our
universe. There they established a capital and six kindred colonies. The
capital, Ghul, was built upon the daemon-king’s mausoleum, which was
itself constructed around his barque.’
‘His barque?’
‘I suppose they mean his ship. The word is closer to “chariot” or “galley”
in literal terms. And I think this may be the key point. The barque was his
war machine, the craft that he rode into battle. It is described – here, and
also here – as being of such power and might that the warped ones who
wrote this were themselves staggered by it.’
He looked at me. ‘The barque of the daemon-king. A weapon of
inconceivable power that lies entombed in the mausoleum of Ghul. That
prize, so I am told, is what Glaw is after.’
‘Told?’
He started, shaking his head. ‘I’m tired. I meant that’s what I’ve learned.
From this. My work.’
‘You said “told”.’
‘I did not.’
‘Distinctly.’
‘Yes, well I did. Because I used the wrong word. Learned. That’s what I
have learned.’
I put my hand on his shoulder, reassuringly, but he flinched. ‘Aemos,
you’ve done an extraordinary job with this. I’ve asked a lot of you.’
‘Yes, you have.’
‘Too much.’
‘I serve you, sir. It is never too much.’
‘I’ll have Maxilla prepare another room for you. You can’t sleep in here.’
‘I’m used to the clutter,’ he said.
‘It’s not the clutter I’m worried about.’
He shuffled away, muttering.
‘I need to take the book back now,’ I said.
‘It’s here somewhere,’ he said, off-hand. ‘I’ll bring it to you later.’
‘I’ll take it now.’
He glared at me.
‘Now, please,’ I repeated.
He pulled the Malus Codicium from under a pile of notes that fluttered
onto the carpet, and held it out. I took hold, but he would not let go.
‘Aemos...’
I managed to yank the book away. The clock mischimed again.
‘I think you should consider your options, Gregor,’ he said.
‘What do you mean?’
‘The powers we face are great. Too great, perhaps. We are woefully
under-strength. I think we should be stronger.’
‘How do you propose we do that?’
‘Summon the daemonhost.’
‘What?’
He took off his heavy augmetic eyeglasses and polished the lenses with
the corner of his robe.
His hands were shaking badly now.
‘I didn’t approve before, on Durer. But I think I grasp things a little better
now. I understand the choices you’ve made. The rules you’ve bent. All for
the good, and I apologise for ever doubting you. With the daemonhost, we
might stand a chance. Summon it here.’
‘How?’
He became agitated with me. ‘Like you did on Miquol!’
‘That was sheer desperation,’ I reproved.
‘We’re desperate now!’
‘And we have no host to summon it into...’
‘You didn’t then!’
‘And it nearly killed us with its raw power before I could trap it.’
‘Then use one of Maxilla’s astropaths as a host!’
I stared at him levelly. ‘I won’t kill a man just to provide a host.’
‘You did on Miquol,’ he hissed softly.
‘What did you just say?’
‘You did on Miquol. Verveuk wasn’t dead. You sacrificed him for the
good of us all. Why would you flinch from doing it again?’
‘Why would I do again something I wish had never happened?’
‘Are we not playing for the highest stakes? One life, sir. What is that
compared to the millions that may die if Glaw succeeds? Summon the
daemonhost. Summon Cherubael to help us.’
I walked slowly to the door. ‘Get some rest,’ I said with forced lightness.
‘You’ll feel better for it. You’ll have changed your mind.’
‘Whatever,’ he said, turning away dismissively.
He was entirely unprepared for the will I unleashed at him.
‘What did it say to you?’ I commanded.
Aemos cried out and his legs gave way. He crashed to the deck and half
overturned a table in his efforts to stay upright.
His papers avalanched onto the floor.
‘It told you, didn’t it? It told you! You damn fool, Uber, what did you
do?’
‘I couldn’t crack the code!’ he wailed. ‘The language was beyond me!
But there was so much more in that book! That beautiful book! I realised I
could do more!’
‘You spoke to the daemonhost.’
‘Nooo!’
‘Then how else would you know its name, because I sure as hell never
told you!’
He shrieked out and staggered back to his feet, his face locked in a
grimace of pain and shame and fear.
‘It was there in the pages!’ he cried. ‘Close like a whisper in my ear! So
soft! It said it could help! It said it would tell me everything I needed if I
could only arrange its release!’
‘Oh, God-Emperor! Everything you’ve told me today you learned from
that bastard thing Cherubael!’
‘It was true!’ he screamed. ‘True! Yssarile! Yssarrrrilllle!’
The clock began to chime furiously. A glass pitcher and three tumblers
on the bureau shattered. One lens of Aemos’s eyeglasses cracked clean
across.
He collapsed onto the floor.
I summoned servitors and took him to the sickbay. For safety, we locked
him in an isolation bay. His safety, and ours.
The damn clock was still chiming when I went back to his room to burn
the papers.
EIGHTEEN
Meeting at Jeganda.
Misplaced loyalties.
To the last, to the death.
AEMOS. ALL THAT last week of travel, he was my primary concern. I kept
a watch on him in the infirmary, but he was generally unresponsive. He
woke a few hours after the confrontation, and then said nothing. He refused
to eat at first, and remained awake, day and night, staring at the locked door
of the isolation chamber.
I dearly wished I hadn’t had to lock it.
After a day he took food and drink, but remained silent. We all attempted
to get some reaction from him. Both Medea and Maxilla tried for hours at a
time.
By the time we reached Jeganda, a day ahead of schedule, our mood was
low.
I had never realised before then how central to our team spirit Aemos had
been. We all missed him. We all hated what had happened.
I hated myself for allowing it.
Aemos had been careless where I should have been able to trust him, but
even so... it was my doing. I hated myself.
And I hated Cherubael, whose baleful influence had been cursing my life
for too long. I wondered if I would ever – could ever – be free of it.
I made a resolution. If I lived, if I vanquished Glaw, I would destroy the
Malus Codicium and then return to Gudrun and destroy Cherubael. I would
take my runestaff and annihilate it, just as I had annihilated its kin
Prophaniti on Farness Beta.
JEGANDA SYSTEM IS dominated by a huge, ringed gas giant. In orbit above
it is an semi-automated waystation established and maintained by a
consortium of trade guilds and Navigator houses as a stop-over and service
facility.
The Essene coasted in. There was no sign of any other vessels. Maxilla
made contact with the station master and a drone tug led us into one of the
wide docking gantries that extended from the rim of the dish-shaped station.
I crossed via the airgate with Maxilla and Medea and we were met by the
master, a hirsute, sluggish man called Okeen. He ran the place with a staff
of four. It was a twenty-month contract, he explained, and then they stood
down in favour of a fresh crew. They didn’t get many visitors, he told us.
They’d be happy to resupply the Essene’s technical needs, for a competitive
price, he told us.
He told us plenty. Isolation does terrible things to men’s minds.
We couldn’t shut him up. I finally left him with Maxilla. Maxilla could
talk too.
Medea and I went to the station’s central hub to see if the resident
astropath had received any messages for us from Gideon. It was a dismal
place of rotting and poorly maintained hallways and dark hangars. There
was a background smell that I decided was spoiled meat and Medea
maintained was stale lactose.
It turned out that, despite Okeen’s non-stop chatter, there was one thing
he hadn’t told us.
Someone was waiting for us in the recreation lounge.
‘Gregor.’ Fischig rose to his feet from a threadbare couch. He was
dressed in black with a waist-length shipboard cape of dark red, wire-shot
fully that was secured at his throat with a small, silver Inquisitorial crest.
I faced him across the room. ‘What are you doing here, Godwyn?’
‘Waiting for you, Gregor. Waiting for a chance to make things right.’
‘And how do you propose doing that?’
He shrugged. It was an open, relaxed, almost apologetic gesture. ‘I said
things I shouldn’t have. Judged you too quickly. I always was a hard-nosed
idiot. You’d think my years of service with you might have taught me the
error.’
‘You’d think,’ quipped Medea.
I held up a warning finger to silence her. ‘You made your feelings
perfectly clear on Hubris, Fischig. I’m not sure we can work together any
more. There’s a mutual lack of trust.’
‘Which I want to do away with,’ he said. I’d never heard him so calm or
sincere.
‘Godwyn, you questioned my purity, branded some of my actions
heretical and then offered to redeem me.’
‘I was drunk for that last part,’ he said, with a tiny flash of smile.
‘Yes, you were. And what are you now?’
‘Here. Willing. Reconciled.’
‘Well,’ I said. ‘Let’s start with the “here” part. How the hell did you
know I’d be here?’
He paused. I looked round slowly at Medea who was studying the deck.
‘You told him where I’d be, didn’t you?’
‘Uhm...’
‘Didn’t you?’
She snapped round to face me, every bit as haughty and rebellious as her
dear, damned father. ‘All right, I did! Okay? We need Fischig—’
‘Maybe we don’t, girl.’
‘Don’t “girl” me, you bastard! He’s one of us. One of the band. He kept
sending to the ship. Sending and sending. You wouldn’t listen to him, so I
replied.’
‘Nayl told me he’d sent one message.’
‘Yeah,’ she said snidely. ‘And Nayl told me what you’d sent back. The
big brush-off. To a man who’s devoted his life to you. A man who got a bit
angry with you and then thought about it and regretted it. Fischig wants to
make amends. He wants to be with us again. Haven’t you ever regretted
anything?’
‘More than you can possibly imagine, Medea. But you should have told
me.’
‘I asked her not to,’ Fischig said. ‘I imagined how you’d react. I’m
grateful Medea thought so highly of me. Could you not find it in you to
trust me again? Trust me like she does?’
‘Quite possibly. But I wanted to do it on my terms, when I was ready.
There’s too much going on just now.’
‘Oh, come on,’ implored Medea.
‘How did you get here?’ I asked Fischig sharply.
‘I got passage on a tramp trader. It dropped me off here a week ago.’
I’d asked the question so I could test his reply and get a measure of his
veracity. As he answered, and I probed delicately out with my mind, I found
the last thing I was expecting.
‘Why are you psi-shielded?’ I asked.
‘Just a precaution,’ he said.
‘Against what?’ I demanded.
‘Against this moment,’ Fischig said. There was true anguish in his eyes.
He drew the compact bolt pistol out from under his cape.
‘Fischig!’ Medea howled in horror.
Barbarisater was already in my hands, humming. ‘Don’t be a fool,’ I said.
He’d only be a fool if he was doing this alone.
The words were not vocal. They were burning wires of psychic venom
wrapped around a monstrous cudgel of mental force that smashed into the
back of my skull. I stumbled forward, half-blind. Medea fell over hard,
totally unconscious.
I saw figures emerging from the doorways off the lounge space all
around. Five, six, more. Men dressed in the hooded, burgundy armour of an
inquisitor’s personal retinue, their chest plates decorated with gold leaf in
the form of the Inquisition’s crest. Two of them grabbed me and ripped the
force sword from my slack fingers. The others aimed their weapons at me.
‘Don’t hurt him! Don’t hurt him!’ Fischig cried.
THE GUARDS DRAGGED me round to face an individual emerging from the
lounge’s greasy kitchenette area. I saw a tall man in black armour and
robes, with a monstrous face that had been surgically deformed to inspire
fear and loathing. It was equine, snouted, with a mouth full of blunt teeth
and dark pools for eyes. Fibre-wire and fluid-tubes formed gleaming ropes
across the back of his skull.
He’d once been the pupil and interrogator of my old, long-dead ally
Commodus Voke. Now he was an inquisitor in his own right.
‘Eisenhorn. How simply vile to see you again,’ said Golesh Constantine
Pheppos Heldane.
The guards dragged Medea and me back on board the Essene. I was still
dazed. I could hear Fischig begging Heldane to order his men to be more
careful with us.
Oh, what a mistake Fischig had made.
As we were bundled through the stations docking gantries, I saw the
sleek black shape of an Inquisitorial cruiser now occupying the dock station
next to the Essene. Heldane’s ship. It had probably lain concealed in the
atmosphere of the gas giant until the trap was sprang.
They took us into the main stateroom. Heldane’s men, and I guessed
there must have been a full detachment, had secured the Essene.
‘How many travellers with you?’ Heldane snapped at me.
I made no answer.
‘How many?’ he repeated, following his words with a blade of psi-pain
that made me cry out. I needed to concentrate. I needed to rebuild my
mental defences.
Feigning injury, I looked around and took stock. Maxilla stood nearby,
surrounded by guards, glowering. Eleena was sitting bolt upright and pale
on a couch. Medea was sprawled on the floor, just waking up. There was no
sign of Aemos or Kara.
‘Four!’ said Maxilla. ‘These four. The rest are my crew, servitors all of
them, slaved into my ship.’ He was playing the part of the innocent
shipmaster, outraged at the invasion of his vessel, distancing himself from
his troublesome passengers. But I knew he was frightened.
‘You’re lying. I can tell,’ said Heldane, pacing round Maxilla. ‘Your
defences are good, I’ll grant you that, ship-master. Don’t lie to me.’
‘I’m not—’ Maxilla began and then cried out in pain.
‘Don’t lie to me!’
‘Leave him alone!’ Fischig boomed. ‘He’s just the captain. The ship-
master, like you said. He’s not part of this.’
Heldane looked round at Fischig with a withering stare. ‘You made this
happen, chastener. You came to the ordos and begged us to save your dear,
heretical master from damnation. Well, that’s what I’m doing. So shut your
mouth and let me get on with it. Or would you rather I probed the minds of
these delicious young ladies?’
‘No.’
‘Good. Because the ship-master is rather interesting. He’s not altogether
human, is he? Are you, Tobias Maxilla? Your defences are admirable, but
only because your brain isn’t entirely organic. You’re so much a machine,
sir, you hardly deserve the title “man”, do you?’ ‘Look who’s talking,’
Maxilla said bravely.
I felt the psi-surge from across the room and it made me wince.
Heldane’s inhuman features folded into an angry, animal roar and Maxilla
stumbled, cried out and fell to his knees, showers of sparks exploding from
burned-out servos in his neck, right shoulder and right wrist.
‘Now will you answer, metal man,’ Heldane leered at Maxilla, ‘or shall I
burn out another part of your blasphemous body?’ ‘There are five,’ I said
loudly. ‘Five of us.’
‘Aha... the heretic speaks,’ Heldane switched round to face me, his
attention drawn from Maxilla, at least for a moment.
‘The other member of my party is my savant, Aemos. I’m sure you
remember him. He’s in the infirmary.’
‘How very obliging of you, Gregor,’ Heldane said. I prayed that I had
outwitted him. Heldane could undoubtedly feel from our minds that
someone was missing. If I showed him Aemos, I hoped he would be
satisfied and miss Kara entirely. ‘I would advise you to leave him there.’
‘Why?’
‘He... there was an accident,’ I said. ‘He is damaged,’ ‘Warp damaged?’
‘No. He will recover.’
‘But he is infirm because of contact with the warp?’ ‘No!’
Heldane turned to a couple of his men. ‘Go to the infirmary. Locate this
man. Kill him and incinerate his remains,’ ‘God-Emperor, no!’ I cried.
I tried to get up, tried to reach out with my mind to wrest Barbarisater
from Heldane’s hands. I was too weak and he was too strong. Another
psychic assault smashed me to the floor.
‘Is everything all right?’ a new voice asked. ‘There was a lot of unseemly
shouting just then.’
‘Everything’s fine, my lord. Welcome aboard,’ I heard Heldane say. I
rolled over and saw the newcomer enter the Essene’s stateroom. He was
resplendent in his brass power-armour, his augmetic jaw as stubbornly set
as the last time I had seen him. ‘Osma...’ I whispered. ‘Grand Master Osma
of the Ordos Helican, if you don’t mind,’ he said sourly.
He had been elevated. Orsini was dead and Leonid Osma had finally
achieved the rank he had spent his life chasing. So much had happened in
the Helican sub-sector since I had become preoccupied with running and
staying alive. Osma, my nemesis, the man who had once tried to have me
declared extremis diabolus and who had imprisoned me, tortured and
hunted me, had now become the master of the Ordos Helican and my
supreme overlord.
THE GUARDS DRAGGED me up onto the mezzanine area of the Essene’s
stateroom and sat me in one of the chairs facing the long banquet table.
They stood back, and Osma and Heldane approached. Osma was holding
Barbarisater and studying the intricate workings of the blade. His own huge
power hammer was anchored to his belt.
Heldane sat down facing me.
‘There’s no love lost between us, Eisenhorn. I won’t insult you by
pretending there is. Make things easy for all of us. Confess.’
‘Confess what?’
‘Your heresy,’ said Osma.
‘I am not a heretic. And this is not a tribunal of my peers. I cannot be
judged so.’
I knew damn well I could. Grand master or no grand master, Osma could
deal with me however the hell he wanted.
‘Confess,’ he said again, sitting down in the seat next to Heldane with a
whine of armour servos. He really was fascinated by Barbarisater, turning it
over in his gauntleted hands.
‘Confess what?’
‘We have a list of charges,’ Heldane said, producing a data-slate from his
cloak. ‘Your man Fischig was very specific about his concerns. You have
consorted with daemons and conjured one of them as a daemonhost on
more than one occasion. You have hidden proscribed texts from the
Inquisition. You have shielded a known heretic from the Inquisition and
allowed him to roam free.’
I fixed Heldane with a hard stare. ‘You mean Pontius Glaw? I’ll admit
nothing, but I’ll tell you this much. If you detain me here, you’ll pay a
much greater price than you can ever imagine. I am sworn to stop Pontius
Glaw and you are preventing me from performing my holy duties.’
‘Your days of performing holy duties are long gone,’ said Osma.
Where is the Malus Codicium?’ Heldane asked.
I toughened my mind shield, hoping against hope that the simple surface
truth would not get out. In my pocket. In my damn pocket. Your men
searched me for weapons but they didn’t bother about a battered old book in
my coat.
Heldane didn’t read it. ‘He’s still wonderfully resilient,’ he told Osma.
They were assuming the Codicium would be in a secure place. A void
safe, a strong box, under my damn mattress! They had no idea it would be
right there in front of them, covered only by a layer of leather coat. I had to
keep that simple, stupid fact from them.
‘Millions will die. Tens of millions perhaps. If you don’t let me finish my
work.’
‘That’s what they all say,’ said Osma. He rose and leaned over at me, his
blunt, grizzled face looming close. ‘You’re going to burn, Eisenhorn. Burn
and suffer. I am only grand master today because I have never suffered
heretics like you. You are the worst kind of fool.’
‘Tell us about the daemonhost,’ said Heldane. Where is it secured? How
can we find it? What are its command words?’
‘Command words?’ I replied. ‘Why would you need those? Do you
intend to control the daemonhost yourself?’
Heldane sat back and glanced at Osma.
‘Of course they don’t!’ said Fischig, who had been lurking on the
mezzanine steps. ‘They’re not heretics like you... they wouldn’t—’
He looked round at Osma and Heldane.
‘You don’t want the daemonhost, do you, masters?’
‘It must be contained and dealt with,’ said Osma. ‘Leave this business to
your superiors, please. You interrupt too much.’
‘But the daemonhost? You talk like you want it for yourselves.’
Osma glanced at the long-snouted inquisitor. ‘Heldane? Tell this man to
go away. He’s served his purpose.’
‘Go, Fischig!’ Heldane snapped, and my former friend descended the
stairs and sat down on one of the couches, gazing at Eleena and Medea,
who were trying to make Maxilla comfortable.
‘The daemonhost!’ Heldane rasped. ‘Give it to us!’
‘And you call me a heretic.’
Heldane’s psychic slap rocked me back in my seat.
A guard approached Osma. ‘We have searched the infirmary, lord. There
is no one there.’
Thank the Emperor, I thought. Kara has freed Aemos.
‘Kara?’ said Heldane suddenly. ‘Who is Kara?’
No one, I willed.
‘There is a sixth person aboard,’ Heldane told Osma. ‘Probably now
working with the savant.’
‘Find them!’ Osma snapped, and half of his guard unit hurried from the
stateroom. ‘Bring more squads across from our ship if you have to.’
There was jolt, followed by a terrible raking squeal of metal on metal
from somewhere outside.
‘What was that?’ Heldane demanded.
He got up and hurried down the steps towards the entrance to the main
bridge. The Essene jolted again.
Osma rose and pointed the tip of Barbarisater at me. ‘Move!’ he ordered.
‘Watch the rest of them,’ he told the guard captain.
We followed Heldane onto the bridge. Fischig joined us, along with
Maxilla, who was being held upright by a guard.
We were listing badly. On the main screen, we could see a forward view
of the waystation.
The Essene had disengaged from its moorings, and was slowly tearing
backwards away from the dock. Docking gantries were grinding and
buckling against the ship’s hull.
‘What have you done?’ Osma said to me.
‘This is none of my doing,’ I replied.
A series of minor explosions ripped through the control stations on the
right hand side of the huge bridge area, showing the marble floor with
sparks and machine-part debris.
Another blast rocked the starboard chapel annex that contained the
astropathic vault and buckled the hatch. A helm servitor combusted and
toppled over, smashing open its sculptural golden casing.
‘Sabotage!’ said Osma.
Heldane turned on Maxilla. ‘Your handiwork!’
‘Mine?’ said Maxilla. ‘Why the hell would I risk damage to my precious
ship just to help these criminals? They mean nothing to me!’
‘You’re lying, you metal freak!’ Heldane barked and grabbed Maxilla by
the throat, lifting him off the ground. ‘Tell us what you’ve done! Put it
right! Get your crew to stabilise the ship!’
‘I’ve done nothing...’ Maxilla choked.
Heldane hurled him across the chamber. The inquisitor was strong by any
standards, but he supplemented his physical strength with telekinesis.
Maxilla hit the wall with a terrible splintering impact, and Heldane held him
there with his powers for an awful moment, squashing him against the
duralloy with his mind. There were several loud cracks of bone and metal.
Then he let him go and the limp, broken body of Tobias Maxilla fell to
the marble deck and lay still.
‘Why did you do that?’ Fischig cried.
‘Shut the hell up, you idiot,’ Heldane answered. ‘We need to get this
vessel locked down.’
Fischig and one of the guards took a few steps forward towards the main
bridge consoles. Fischig knew the Essene. He probably thought he could
access the thrusters and level us out before the dock gantries did any more
damage to the hull.
The astropathic vault blew out in a sheet of white flame that atomised
two of the helm stations and threw Fischig and the guard off their feet.
Screaming and writhing, incandescent with green tongues of fire that
washed across its naked contorting body, a figure levitated out of the
burning vault.
But it wasn’t screaming. It was laughing.
It was Cherubael.
It was shining so brightly it hurt to behold it, but I could see enough to
realise it was wearing the body of one of the Essene s astropaths. Plug
sockets still decorated its gleaming flesh, some still trailing wires. All
clothing had burned away, but the astropath’s extensive bionic
augmentation was clear. The body had no legs, just a dangling assembly of
cables and machined connectors where the astropath, like most of Maxilla’s
crew, had plugged directly and permanently into a vault socket.
Heldane and two of the guards ran towards it, the guards shouting prayers
against the warp as they opened fire. Heldane drew a force sword from his
waist. I felt the backwash as he assaulted the daemonhost with the full force
of his psychic powers.
Osma was staring at the daemonhost in astonishment. It suddenly
occurred to me that despite his rank and authority, he probably had very
little first hand experience of abominations like Cherubael.
‘You wanted the daemonhost, grand master,’ I said. ‘Looks like you’ve
got him.’
My words snapped him into activity and he looked round, but
Barbarisater was already hissing through the air directly into my extended
hand.
‘Heretic!’ he screamed. His power hammer swung up in his plated fists,
crackling with energy and he came at me. He had significant advantage. He
was psi-shielded and heavily armoured against an adversary with no armour
whatsoever.
Our weapons crashed together. We broke and swung again. There was
massive strength behind his blows and I was still weak from the psychic
mauling Heldane had given me.
‘There’s no time for this, you fool!’ I yelled. ‘I didn’t unleash the
daemonhost, but I’m the only chance you have to stop it!’
Behind us, Cherubael giggled hysterically as it torched the guards firing
at it. It skimmed down and locked in combat with the furious Heldane.
Osma was defiant. He would not break off. He deflected my sword stroke
with a hammerblow so powerful I was rocked back, my guard open. His
follow-through came right at my face and I threw my body back to evade it.
It missed. Barely. The hammer’s energy scorched my cheek.
But I had lost my footing.
I crashed over onto the marble deck and rolled sideways as the hammer
came down and cracked the stone flags. Osma’s weapon, the Malleus
symbol of his ordo, rushed up again for the deathstroke.
There was a shriek of energy and the air above me was split by a blinding
turquoise beam. It struck Osma full in the face and vaporised his head in a
splash of light, bone shards and adipose tissue. His body hit the floor with a
metallic crash and the fused remains of his heavy augmetic jaw bounced
away across the deck.
I rose.
Maxilla, still sprawled and wretchedly twisted where Heldane had
dropped him, slowly lowered his hand. The digital ring weapon on his
elegantly gloved finger was glowing.
I turned back to the fight. Medea and Eleena had entered the room along
with the remaining guards, looking on in horror. Some of the guards fled.
Heldane was being driven back across the bridge by the radiant, cackling
daemonhost. He was throwing everything he had at Cherubael, and the
daemon was just laughing, teeth backlit into silhouette by the light of the
warp streaming out of its gaping maw.
Heldane’s robes were beginning to smoulder.
‘Eleena!’ I shouted and she ran to me. None of the awestruck guards
even tried to stop her.
‘There’s no time to do this cleanly. I need you next to me. You may be
able to block some of its power.’
She nodded and grabbed my coat with both hands. She was terrified out
of her wits. But she did not falter.
I pulled the Malus Codicium from my coat and leafed desperately
through the pages. I couldn’t find what I was looking for. I damn well
couldn’t find what I was looking for!
The marble deck of the bridge cracked and parted underneath Heldane
like solid ground split by an earth tremor. One of his feet slipped into the
crack and he swayed.
Cherubael snorted with glee and clapped its hands. The deck quaked and
the crack closed again, like a vice.
Heldane screamed. He screamed the terrible howl of the damned. He was
pinned into the deck by his crushed leg. Cherubael advanced.
Heldane slashed with his sword in terror. The blade melted. The
inquisitor’s clothes caught fire. Ablaze from head to foot with green flames,
he screamed again. On fire, upright, fixed to the spot, he looked just like a
heretic burning at the stake.
Cherubael looked away from his prey, bored with it now it was dying. It
surged forward and floated towards me. Eleena let out a sobbing whimper.
‘Stay close!’ I told her.
‘Hello, Gregor,’ said Cherubael. Its voice was hoarse and impaired. The
astropath it inhabited hadn’t spoken for many years and the voice organs
had partially atrophied.
‘Don’t we have fun together, Gregor?’ it went on, its blank eyes fixed on
me. It was smiling, but there was nothing warm in those vacant orbs.
Nothing at all, in fact, except evil.
‘It’s always such a delight to play these games with you. But this game
must be a bit of surprise, eh? Didn’t expect to see me, did you? It wasn’t
you that called me this time.’
It came closer. I could feel, not heat, but burning cold emanating from it.
I was still ripping through the pages of the book to find what I was looking
for.
‘Here’s another surprise for you,’ it added, dropping its voice to a
whisper. ‘This is the last time we play. I’ve had enough of the way you
make up all the games. You see what I did to that horse-faced idiot? I won’t
do that to you, old friend. I’ll do something that really, really hurts.’
It lunged forward but then backed off slightly, as if stung. It had touched
the psychic deadzone around Eleena. Cherubael turned his attention down
towards her.
‘Hello. Aren’t you a sweet little thing? What a pretty face! Shame I’m
going to ruin it.’
‘Mmmh!’ Eleena sobbed.
‘You’re a clever old stick, Gregor. Always careful enough to have an
untouchable at your side when you meet with me. This isn’t the regular one,
though, is it? What happened to her?’
I wrenched the book open.
‘She won’t save you, mind,’ said Cherubael, reaching out with hands that
were sprouting thick, ugly talons.
I thrust the book up and held it in front of his eyes with both hands,
clamping the pages open so that the daemonhost could clearly see.
It was diagrams of the four chief runes of banishment. They wouldn’t
banish Cherubael, because they hadn’t been properly invoked. But I was
pretty sure just reading them would hurt.
Cherubael squealed and tumbled back. I stepped forward a pace, keeping
the book raised and open.
Wracked with agony, the daemonhost soared back across the bridge,
crashed through the main screen and shattered the hololithic plates in a
shower of crystal and sparks. It bounced twice off the ceiling like a
maddened hornet fighting a window pane, the colour of its flame-halo
turning yellow and then furnace orange.
Cherubael dropped, hit the floor and burned through it leaving a circular,
smouldering hole.
‘Oh dear Emperor—’ Eleena gasped.
‘Come on!’ I said. ‘It won’t be long before it comes back for another try.
Move!’
Medea ran forward. The last few guards were busy beating out the flames
swathing Heldane with their capes. He was still screaming.
‘Get her out of here!’ I told Medea, pushing Eleena towards her. ‘Hangar
deck! Go!’
They hurried towards the exit. Deep, bass detonations from somewhere
deep in the Essene rocked the floor. Multiple alarms were sounding. Sparks
cascaded from the buckled ceiling of the bridge.
I went over to Maxilla. His eyes flickered and he looked up at me. ‘I
didn’t mean it...’ he said in a tiny voice.
‘Mean what?’
‘I told that brute none of you meant anything to me. But I didn’t mean it.’
‘I know.’
‘Thank you,’ he said, and died.
I RAN FROM the bridge into one of the main longitudinal corridors. Smoke
was boiling along it from untold damage below. On the floor, I saw
weapons and cloaks dropped by Osma’s guards in their panic to leave.
I’d taken about a dozen steps when a loud voice told me to halt.
Fischig was coming after me, aiming his bolt pistol with a straight, firm
arm. He was bloodied and bruised by the explosion that had knocked him
down, but there was an utterly determined set to his face. I’d seen that look
before, but I’d never been on the receiving end of it.
‘Stop where you are,’ he said.
‘Come on! We have to get clear. The ship is dying.’
‘Stop where you are,’ he repeated.
‘Come with me. I’ll explain everything and you’ll see why it’s vital for
us to—’
‘Shut up,’ he said. ‘It’s all lies. It’s always been lies. You know you
nearly fooled me back then. I was almost convinced I’d made a terrible
mistake going to Osma. But then you showed your true colours. Brought
that daemon back and proved that everything I feared about you was true.’
‘This isn’t the time or place, Godwyn. I’m leaving now. Come with me if
you want.’
I turned my back on him and walked away.
‘Gregor, please—’
I kept walking. I was sure he wouldn’t shoot. We went back too far.
When it came down to it, he wouldn’t be able to stop me.
The boltgun roared. The shot exploded my left knee. I cried out and fell,
leaning on Barbarisater. There was blood everywhere. I couldn’t believe
he’d found the will to do it.
With a yelp of pain I hauled myself up on the sword. He fired again and
now my right leg went out from under me, also mangled at the knee.
I lay on my back. I could feel the death throes of the Essene quaking and
thundering through the deck beneath me. Fischig stood over me.
‘Stop this...’ I gasped. ‘Get me to the hangar.’
He drew back the slide of the bolt pistol. He was shaking with distress,
wracked by grief and disappointment and duty and belief.
‘Please,’ he said. ‘Renounce it all. Repent your sins and accept the
Emperor for the good of your soul. It’s not too late.’
‘You’re still trying to save me,’ I managed to get the words out through
the pain. ‘Glory be, Fischig... you actually shot me so you could try and
save my soul?’
‘Renounce the warp!’ he stammered. ‘Please! I can save you! You’re my
friend and I can still save you from yourself!
‘I don’t need saving,’ I said.
He aimed the gun at my head. His finger tightened on the trigger. ‘May
the Emperor protect you, Gregor Eisenhorn,’ he said.
He twitched. Once. Twice. He swayed. The bolt pistol wandered in his
lolling hand and fired, harmlessly, against the corridor wall. He dropped to
his knees and then fell forward onto his face as if he was praying.
I struggled to pull myself up so I could lean my back against the wall.
My legs were crippled, bloody and useless.
Medea crouched down next to me. Tears were streaming down her
cheeks. She let go of the needle pistol and let it clatter onto the deck.
KARA APPEARED BEHIND us, a las-carbine in her hands, with Eleena and
Aemos at her heels. They all looked in horror at the sight of me and Fischig.
Aemos was deathly pale, and leaning on my runestaff like a penitent
pilgrim.
‘Help me up,’ I said, from between clenched teeth. Kara and Medea
hoisted me up between them.
I looked at Aemos. ‘You summoned Cherubael? It was you, wasn’t it?
You summoned him into one of the Essene’s poor bloody astropaths?’
‘They were going to burn us as heretics,’ he said softly, ‘and then we’d
never be able to stop Glaw.’
‘But how did you perform the rituals, Uber? You didn’t even have the
book any more.’
‘That book,’ he sighed. ‘That damn book. It’s all in here now,’ He tapped
his wrinkled forehead with a scrawny finger.
He’d memorised it. During those weeks of study he’d memorised the
Mains Codicium. Thanks to a meme-virus, he was a data addict. That’s
what made him such a fine savant. And now his addiction had taken him to
overdose.
‘You memorised the whole thing?’
‘Word,’ he swallowed and then finished, ‘perfect.’
There was another juddering boom and a rush of hot air gusted down the
corridor.
‘Are we gonna stand around like ninkers all day or are we gonna get off
this ship?’ Kara snapped, bracing against me.
‘I think that might be wise,’ I agreed.
But the way was blocked. Cherubael had come back for me.
Its malicious rampage had crippled the Essene. It was still seething with
the pain I had inflicted. It wasn’t even talking any more.
It surged down the corridor towards us. I couldn’t reach the Malus
Codicium now. I was having enough trouble just standing up.
Eleena cried out in terror. I cursed, helpless, useless.
Aemos hobbled forward and place himself between us and the charging
warp-spawn. He braced the runestaff against the floor and lowered the tip
towards Cherubael. He knew what to do. May the God-Emperor show him
mercy, he knew better than I.
There was a release of power and light so powerful that it was beyond
sound. The host body disintegrated, showering us with a hail of burned
flesh, charred bone and blackened augmetic debris.
Aemos and the runestaff shuddered and jerked as they both lit up with
corposant that crackled and flashed up and down them.
The last few electrical arcs sizzled away into the deck. Aemos remained
standing where he was with the staff still upraised. A tiny plume of smoke
licked off the headpiece.
‘Aemos? Aemos!’
‘I’ve... dispossessed it... for a moment...’ Aemos said without turning
round. His voice was low and his words were emerging only by huge effort.
‘...So it’s weak... and confused... but that won’t... last... we need... a proper
host vessel... for it to... occupy...’
He turned to face us. The destruction of the astropath’s host body had
singed his clothes and knocked his eyeglasses off.
‘What did you do with it?’ I asked.
He didn’t answer. The effort would have been too great. Aemos would
only ever say two more words to me.
‘Aemos, what did you do with it?’ I repeated.
He opened his eyes. They were blank. Completely blank.
IT TOOK US ten minutes to make the daemonhost safe, ten minutes we
really didn’t have. I was encumbered by the fact I couldn’t move unaided.
Eleena had to hold the Malus Codicium for me as I did the work, making
the marks and runes and wardings with blood from my own wounds. I
recalled the same hasty rituals I had performed on the beach at Miquol.
‘Come on!’ Kara urged.
‘There! It’s done! Aemos, can you hear me? It’s done!’
His old hands were shaking. He lowered the staff. I could see his mouth
trying to form the words, but he couldn’t manage it.
But I knew this part. The incantation, the litany, the abduration against
evil. The final sealing words.
‘In servitutem abduco, I bind thee fast forever into this host!’
MEDEA NEARLY BURNED out the lift-jets of Maxilla’s bulk pinnace getting
us clear of the hangar deck. Everything shook. It didn’t have anything like
the kick of the old gun-cutter, but she nursed every last ounce of thrust she
could out of it.
We managed to get about sixteen kilometres from the Essene when the
first of the real spasms shook it. The majestic sprint-trader, Isolde-pattern,
pride of its master, looked like a black shell to us, lit from within by raging
atomic fires, spilling trails of debris behind it as it slowly tumbled into the
embrace of the gas giant.
There was a small bright flash and then two more, almost simultaneous,
like a flicker. Then a white dot appeared where the Essene had been, and
grew bigger, and then became a white line that got brighter and longer and
closer, until we could see it was the flaming edge of a huge expanding disk
of nuclear energy.
The pinnace vibrated frantically like a bead rattle in the hand of an
excited child as the shockwave seared past and around us.
Then it was quiet, and still again.
And the Essene was gone.
AEMOS WAS CRUMPLED in one of the high-backed acceleration seats in the
pinnace’s passenger space. His eyes were closed and his breathing was
shallow and ragged.
Kara helped me to the seat next to him. She was saying something urgent
about improving the tourniquets and field dressings on my legs but I didn’t
really hear her.
‘Uber?’
As if I had disturbed him in his sleep, he opened his eyes. They were his
eyes again. Bloodshot, old, blinking to focus without his eyeglasses.
His breath sounds were getting worse.
‘You hold on,’ I said. ‘There’s a portable medicae unit in the cargo
section, Eleena’s trying to get it working.’
He grunted something and swallowed.
‘What?’ I said.
He surprised me by suddenly taking my blood-stained hand and gripping
it tightly. He turned his head slowly and squinted at the daemonhost we had
made together. It sat, strapped into its seat, on the other side of the aisle,
head bowed and dormant.
‘Most...’ he whispered. ‘Most perturbatory...’
I was going to reply, but his grip had slackened, his breathing had
stopped. My oldest friend had gone.
I sat back, gazing at the cabin roof. The sensations that I had been
blocking swept in and overwhelmed me.
I felt frail, as if I was made of paper. I knew I had lost a huge quantity of
blood.
The pain in my legs was like fire, but it was nothing compared to the pain
in my heart.
I heard Kara calling my name. She called it again. I heard Eleena asking
me to say something.
But the void had come up like a wall, and they were too far away to hear.
NINETEEN
In the Halls of Yssarile.
Leaves of Darkness.
In the name of the Holy God-Emperor.
SOMEONE, SOMEWHERE CLOSE by, was using one of those damned
shuriken catapults. I could hear the jhut! jhut! jhut! of the launcher
mechanism and the thin, brittle sounds of the impacts.
There was blood in my mouth, I noticed. I’d worry about it later. Crezia
would fuss no doubt. ‘You should not be doing this,’ she had warned me
fiercely in the infirmary of the Hinterlight.
Well, that’s where she was wrong. This was the Emperor’s work. This
was my work.
‘Moving up,’ Nayl said over the intervox. ‘Twenty paces.’
‘Understood,’ I replied. I stepped forward. It was still an effort, and still
very much a surprise to feel my body so wretchedly slow. The crude
augmetic braces around my legs and torso weighed me down and forced me
to plod, like an ogre from the old myths.
Or like a Battle Titan, I considered, ruefully. One heavy footstep after the
next, lumbering to my destiny.
It was the best work Crezia and Antribus had been able to manage given
the time and the resources available. Crezia had passionately wanted me
confined to vital support until I could be delivered to a top level Imperial
facility.
I’d insisted on being mobile.
‘If we throw together repairs now,’ she had said, ‘it’ll be worse in the
long term. To get you walking we’ll have to do things that no amount of
later work can repair, no matter how excellent.’
‘Just do it,’ I’d said. For the opportunity to reach Pontius Glaw, I’d
happily sacrifice prosthetic sophistication. All I needed was function.
Barbarisater trembled in my right fist as it sensed a bio-aura, but I
relaxed. It was Kara Swole.
She jogged back down the chasm towards me, dressed in a tight, green
armoured bodyglove and a thick, quilted flak coat. She had a dust visor on,
and a fat-nosed compact handcannon slung over her shoulder.
‘All right, boss?’ she said
‘I’m doing fine.’
‘You look...’
‘What?’
‘Pissed off.’
‘Thank you, Kara. I’m probably annoyed because you and Nayl are
having all the fun taking point.’
‘Well, Nayl thinks we should tighten up anyway.’
I voxed back to the second element of our force. In less than two
minutes, Eleena and Medea had joined us. Along side them came Lief
Gustine and Korl Kraine, two men from Gideon’s band who had subbed as
reinforcements, as well as Gideon’s mercenary archaeologist, Kenzer.
‘Moving up,’ I told them.
‘You managing okay, sir?’ Eleena asked.
‘I’m fine. Fine. I just wish you’d...’ I stopped. ‘I’m fine, thank you,
Eleena.’
They were all still worried about me. It had only been three and half
weeks since the carnage at Jeganda. I’d only been walking for five days.
They all quietly agreed with Crezia’s advice that I should still be in the
infirmary and leaving this to Ravenor.
Well, that was the perk of being the boss. I made the damn decisions. But
I shouldn’t be angry with them for worrying. But for Kara and Eleena’s
frantic emergency work on the pinnace, I’d be dead. I’d crashed twice.
Eleena, the only one whose blood-type matched mine, had even made last
minute donations.
Pulled apart at the seams, my band was pulling together tighter than ever.
‘Let’s pick up the pace,’ I said. ‘We don’t want Nayl and Ravenor to have
all the glory.’
‘After you, Ironhoof,’ Medea said. Kara sniggered, but pretended she
was having trouble with her filter mask.
‘I can’t imagine why you think you can get away with that nickname,’ I
said.
We heard the shuriken catapult buzzing again. It was close, the sound
rolling back to us around the maze of the gorge.
‘Someone’s having a party,’ said Gustine. Bearded, probably to help
disguise the terrible scarring that seemed to cover his entire skin, Gustine
was an ex-guardsman turned ex-pit fighter turned ex-bounty hunter turned
Inquisition soldier. He said he came from Raas Bisor in the Segmentum
Tempestus, but I didn’t know where that was. Apart from that it was in the
Segmentum Tempestus. Gustine wore heavyweight grey ablative armour
and carried a old, much-repaired standard IG lasrifle.
He’d been with Ravenor for a good many years, so I trusted him.
The whizzing sounds echoed again, overlapping with laser discharges.
‘Ravenor’s friends,’ Medea said. None of us were comfortable about the
eldar. Six of them had arrived on Gideon’s ship as a bodyguard for the
farseer. Tall, too tall, inhumanly slender, silent, keeping themselves to the
part of the ship assigned them. Aspect warriors, Gideon had called them,
whatever that meant. The plumed crests on their great, curved helmets had
made them seem even taller once they were in armour.
They’d deployed to the surface with Ravenor, the seer lord and three
more of Ravenor’s band.
A third strike team of six under Ravenor’s senior lieutenant Rav Skynner,
was advanced about a kilometre to our west.
Ghul, or 5213X to give it its Carto-Imperialis code, was nothing like I
had imagined it. It didn’t at all resemble the arid world I had glimpsed in
Maria Tarray’s mind, the dried-out husk where primaeval cities lay buried
under layers of ash. I suppose that was because all I’d seen was her own
imagined view of the place. She’d never seen it. She hadn’t lived long
enough to get the chance.
I wondered if Ghul matched the farseer’s vision. Probably. The eldar
seemed unnecessarily precise bastards to me.
We’d approached the world in a wide, stealthy orbit. The Hinterlight was
equipped with disguise fields that Ravenor was reluctant to explain to me
but which I felt were partly created by his own, terrifyingly strong will.
High band sensors had located a starship in tight orbit, a rogue trader of
some considerable size that didn’t appear to realise we were there.
Ghul itself was invisible. Or nearly invisible. I have never seen a world
that seemed so much to be not there. It was a shadow against the starfield, a
faintly discernable echo of matter. Even on the sunward side, it lacked any
real form. It appeared to soak up light and give nothing back.
When Cynia Preest, Ravenor’s ship-mistress, had brought us the first
surface scans to study, we thought she was showing us close up pictures of
a child’s toy.
‘It’s a maze,’ I remember saying.
‘A puzzle... like an interlock,’ Ravenor decided.
‘No, a carved fruit pit,’ Medea had said.
We had all looked at her. ‘The works of the Lord on the heart of a stone?’
she asked. ‘Anybody?’
‘Perhaps you’d explain?’ I’d said.
So she had. A some length, until we grasped the idea. The hermits of
Glavia, so it seems, thought no greater expression of their divine love for
the Emperor could be made than to inscribe the entire Imperial Prayer onto
the pits of sekerries. A sekerry, we learned, was a soft, sweet summer fruit
that tasted of quince and nougat. A bit like a shirnapple, we were reliably
informed. The pits were the size of pearls.
Thankfully, no one had made the mistake of asking what a shirnapple
was.
‘I don’t know how they do it,’ Medea had gone on. ‘They do it by eye,
with a needle, They can’t even see, I don’t think. But they used to show us
liths of the carved pits, magnified, in scholam. You could read every word!
Every last word! The works of the Lord on the heart of a stone. All laced
together, tight and compact, using every corner of the space. We were
taught that the prayer pits were one of the Nineteen Wonders of Glavia and
that we should be proud.’
‘Nineteen Wonders?’ Cynia had asked.
‘Golden Throne, woman, don’t get her started!’ I had cried out. But there
had indeed been something in Medea’s comparison. The surface of Ghul
had been engraved, that’s what it looked like. A perfect black sphere,
engraved across its entire surface with tight, deep, interlocking lines. In
reality, each of those lines was a smooth sided gorge, two hundred metres
wide and nine hundred metres deep.
I wondered about Medea’s description. I remembered the chart we had
witnessed during the auto-séance on Promody, and the way dear Aemos’s
notes had taken on the same scrolling forms of the chart as he struggled to
decipher it.
Ghul could very well be engraved, I decided. The warped ones’ entire
culture, certainly their language, had been built upon expressions of
location and place. I imagined that the inscribed wall we had seen during
the auto-séance had been part of just such a maze of lines, from a time
when Promody had looked like Ghul, the capital world.
CYNIA PREEST’S SENSORS had located heat and motion traces on the
surface. We’d assembled the teams, and prepared for planetfall. The
Hinterlight’s ship-mistress had been told to line up on the enemy’s ship and
stand ready to take it out.
Our three vessels, my pinnace and two shuttles from Ravenor’s stable,
had sunk low into the thin atmosphere and skimmed across the perfect,
geometric surface, their shadows flitting across the flat black sections and
the deep chasms.
We’d put down in adjacent gorges near the target zone.
The first surprise had been that the air was breathable. We’d all brought
vacuum suits and rebreathers.
‘How is that possible?’ Eleena had asked.
‘I don’t know.’
‘But it’s so unlikely... I mean it’s unfeasible,’ she had stammered.
‘Yes, it is.’
THE SECOND SURPRISE had been the discovery that Medea was right.
Kenzer had knelt down with his auspex at the side of the gorge, studying
microscopically the relationship between chasm floor and chasm wall.
I didn’t need him to tell me they were perfect. Smooth. Exact. Machined.
Engraved.
‘The angle between floor and wall is ninety degrees to a margin of
accuracy that... well, it is so precise, it goes off my auspex’s scale. Who...
who could do a thing like this?’ Kenzer had gasped.
‘The hermits of Glavia?’ Medea had cracked.
‘If they had fusion beams, starships, a spare planet and unlimited power
supplies,’ I had said. ‘Besides, tell me this: who polished the planet smooth
before they started?’
WE MOVED DOWN the gorge. It curved gently to the west, like an old river,
deep cut in its banks. Long before on KCX-1288, facing the sarathi, I had
been disconcerted by the lack of angular geometry. Now I was disturbed by
the reverse. Everything was so damned precise, squared off, unmarked and
unblemished. Only a faint sooty deposit in the wide floor of the trench
suggested any antiquity at all.
We caught up with Nayl.
‘They know we’re here,’ he said, referring to the sounds of battle in the
nearby gorge.
‘Any idea of numbers?’ I asked.
‘Not a thing, but Skynner’s mob has found trouble too. Vessorines, so he
reckon, wrapped up in carapace suits and loaded for bear.’
‘We’d best be careful then.’
I tried Ravenor, using my mind instead of my intervox.
Status?
THE ASPECTS HAVE—
Whoa, whoa, whoa... quieter, Gideon.
Sorry. I forget sometimes you—
I what?
You’re hurt, I meant to say. The aspect warriors have engaged. It’s quite
busy here.
I could feel the sub-surface twinges of power as he channelled his mind
into his force chair’s psi-cannons.
Opposition? I sent.
Vessorine janissaries and some other heterodox mercs. We—
He broke off. There was a grinding wash of distortion for a moment.
Sorry, he sent. Some sort of fusion weapon. They certainly don’t want us
in here.
In where?
He broadcast a sequence of map co-ordinates and I took the map-slate
out of Nayl’s hands and punched them in.
A structure, Ravenor sent. Ahead of us, south-west of you. It’s built into
the end pier of one of the gorge junctions. Although I can’t see how. There
are no doors. The Vessorine are coming out of somewhere, though. There
must be a hidden entrance.
More distortion. Then he floated back to me.
The Vessorine are fighting like maniacs. My lord seer says they have
already earned the respect of the aspects.
Your lord seer?
Send again. I didn’t make that out.
Nothing, Gideon. We’re going to try and come round on your flank,
around the north-east intersection of the gorge.
Understood.
Come on! I urged. The others all jumped, all except Eleena, and I realised
I was still using my psyche. Sloppy. I was tired and in pain. Still no excuse.
‘My apologies,’ I said, vocal again. ‘We’re moving forward. This chasm
turns south-west and intersects with two others. Target site’s at the junction,
so Gideon reckons.’
We hurried forward, moving through the steep shadow of the gorge.
‘Glory be!’ exclaimed Kenzer suddenly. He was looking up.
Bright flashes lit up the starry sky framed by the sides of the chasm. They
washed back and forth like spills of milk in ink. Alerted to our presence,
Glaw’s starship had presented for combat and the Hinterlight was
answering. Vast blinks of light lit up the sky like a strobe.
‘I wouldn’t wanna be up there,’ said Korl Kraine. Kraine was a hiver
who’d never served in any formal militia. His allegiance was to Ravenor
first and to the underclan of Tanhive Nine, Tansetch, second and last. He
was a short, pale man wearing patched and cut-off flak-canvas. His skin
was dyed with clan colours and his eyes were cheap augments. He wore a
string of human teeth around his neck, which was ironic as his own teeth
were all made of ceramite.
Kraine raised his night-sighted Tronsvasse autorifle to his shoulder and
scurried forward. He’d lived in a lightless warren of city all his life until
Ravenor recruited him. This gloom suited him.
The sound of catapults grew louder. There were several of them at work
now, buzzing out a duet with heavyweight lasguns. I heard the gritty thump
of a grenade.
Kenzer, the archaeologist, was lagging. He wasn’t part of Ravenor’s
official troop, merely an expert paid to help out on Promody. I didn’t like
him much. He had no fibre and no real commitment.
I didn’t need to read his mind to see that he was only here for the
potential fortune a few exclusive academic papers about the Ghul discovery
could make him.
‘Hurry up!’ I yelled at him. My back was getting tired and the blood in
my mouth was back again.
Kenzer was hunched down at the base of the chasm side, fidgeting with
his hand-scanner.
I called a halt and stomped back to him, my heavy boots, reinforced with
the brace’s metal frame, kicking up soot. Ironhoof, indeed!
I believed my greatest annoyance wasn’t the brace-frame or its weight or
the lumpen gait I was forced to adopt, not even the non-specific
haemorrhage that was seeping into my mouth.
No, the worst thing was my cold scalp.
I really couldn’t get used to it. Crezia had been obliged to shave my head
in order to implant the cluster of neural and synaptic cables that would drive
the augmetic frame around my legs. She had been upset all through the
implant procedure. It really was terribly crude, even by basic Imperial
standards. But out in the middle of nowhere at all, it had been the best she
and Antribus could cobble together.
Needs must, as they say.
I was bald, and the back of my skull was raw, sore and clotted with the
multiple implant jacks of the sub-spine feeds my faithful medicaes had
installed to make my leg frame work. The steel-jacketed cables sprouted
from my scalp and ran down my back into the lumbar servo of the walking
brace. The bunched cables were flesh-stapled to my back, like a neat,
augmetic ponytail.
I would get used to it, in time. If there was time. If there wasn’t, what the
hell did it matter?
I stopped beside Kenzer, throwing a hard shadow over him.
‘What are you doing?’
‘Making a recording, sir,’ he gabbled. ‘There’s a marking here. The
carved walls we’ve seen so far have been blank.’
I peered down. It was difficult to bend.
‘Where?’
He pulled a puffer-brash out of his kit-pack and blew the soot away.
‘There!’
A small spiral. Cut into the smooth face of the rock.
It looked like a tiny version of the chart we’d seen on Promody, or a
really tiny version of the mazed surface of this planet.
‘Record it quickly and move on,’ I told him. I turned away. ‘Let’s go,’ I
called over my shoulder curtly.
Kenzer screamed. There was a flurry of las-fire.
I wheeled back immediately. Kenzer was sprawled on the floor of the
gorge, ripped apart by laser shots. He was only partially articulated, such
had been the point blank ferocity of the shots. The wide puddle of blood
seeping from his carcass was soaking into the soot.
There was no sign of any attacker.
‘What the hell?’ Barbarisater was in my hand and had been purring, but
now it was dull.
Nayl dropped close to me, his matt-black hellgun sweeping the area of
the corpse.
‘How in the name of Terra did that happen?’ he asked. ‘Lief? Korl?
Upside?’
I looked back. Gustine and Kraine were walking backwards slowly,
scoping up at the cliff tops of the gorge.
‘Nothing. No shooters above,’ Gustine reported.
I slapped my palm against the cold stone face of the gorge above the
marking Kenzer had found. It was unyielding.
We moved forward, following the sweep of the chasm. Kraine was
covering our backs. After we’d gone about fifty metres, he suddenly cried
out.
I turned in time to see him in a face-to-face gunfight with two Vessorine
janissaries in full carapace-wear. Kraine staggered backwards as he was hit
repeatedly in the torso, but managed to keep firing. He put a burst of rounds
through the face plate of one of the Vessorines before the other one made
the kill shot and dropped him into the soot.
Nayl and Medea were already firing. The remaining Vessorine swung his
aim and squeezed off another salvo, winging both Eleena and Nayl.
Then he walloped over onto his back as Kara’s cannon ripped him apart.
‘See to them!’ I ordered, pointing Medea at Nayl and Eleena. Nayl had
been skinned across the left arm and Eleena had a flesh wound on her left
shin. Both kept insisting they were fine. Medea opened his kitbag for field
dressings.
I looked at the corpses, Kraine and the Vessorines. Gustine appeared
beside me. ‘Where the jesh did they come from?’ he asked.
I didn’t answer. I drew my runestaff over my head out of its leather boot,
and gripped it tightly as I focused my force at the gorge wall. Soot and the
debris of eons puffed out, and I saw another spiral mark in the wall like the
one Kenzer had found.
‘Charts,’ I said.
‘What, sir?’ asked Lief.
I bent down, spitting on my fingers then rubbing my hand across the
spiral marks. I tried to ignore the fact that there was a smear of blood in the
spittle.
‘No wonder Ravenor couldn’t find a door. We’re not seeing this in the
right dimension.’
‘Pardon me, but what the craphole are you talking about?’ asked Lief. I
liked him. Always honest.
‘The warped ones understood location and moment in way we can’t
imagine. They were, after all, warped. We see this as a geometric network
of mathematically precise chasms, a maze. But it’s not. It’s four
dimensional...’
‘Four?’ Gustine began, uncertainly
‘Oh, four, six, eight... who knows? Think of it this way, like a... a woven
garment.’
‘A woven garment, sir?’
‘Yes, all those thick, intertwined threads, such a complex pattern.’
‘All right...’
‘Now imagine the knitting needles that made it. Just the needles. Big and
hard and simple.’
‘Okay...’ said Medea, joining us.
‘This planet is simply the knitting needles. Hard, rigid, simple. The
reality of Ghul is the garment woven from it, something we can’t see,
something complex and soft, interlaced round the needles.’
‘I’m sorry, sir, you’ve lost me,’ Lief Gustine said.
‘Lost,’ I said. ‘That’s damn right. These marks on the wall. They’re like
mini charts, explaining how the overall reality can be accessed and exited.’
Ghustine nodded as if he understood. ‘Right... so, going back, where the
jesh did the janissaries come from?’ he asked.
I slapped the hard wall.
‘There. Right there.’
‘But it’s solid rock!’
‘Only to us,’ I said.
AS WE MOVED on again, down the gorge, we formed a pack that covered
all sides, like phalanx of spearmen from the old ages of warfare. The sounds
of Ravenor’s battle had become frenetic. Nayl reported grimly that he
couldn’t raise Skynner or any of his force any more.
We all hunted the walls for further carvings
‘Here, sir! Here!’ Kara sang out.
I ran over to the spiral cut she had found. ‘Wait,’ I ordered.
Like an eye blinking, the smooth rock opened. Suddenly it just wasn’t
there. A Vessorine janissary in combat carapace pushed out, weapon raised.
Nayl had him cold, felling him with a single shot. But there were more
behind the first.
Medea started shooting. Two more mercs had blinked out of the gorge
wall on the far side of us.
There was no cover. No damn cover at all.
In a moment, we were fired on from a third angle.
I had already drawn the big Hecuter autopistol I had borrowed from the
Hinterlight’s arsenal. Gustine’s old las was cracking away beside me and
Eleena was emptying her pistol’s extended clip on semi-automatic.
They’d just been poaching us up until now. This was a full scale ambush.
I counted at least fifteen janissaries, as well as an ogryn with a heavy
weapon. Nayl went down, hit in the thigh, but he kept blasting. A las round
sparked bluntly against the heavy brace on my left leg.
Time to reset the odds.
‘Cherubael!’ I commanded.
It had been drifting high above the gorge, trailing us like a kite, but now
it descended, gathering speed, beginning to shine.
I had been much more careful in my design of this daemonhost.
Elaborating on the basic and hasty ritual construction Aemos and I had
wrought in those last few minutes aboard the Essene, I had supplemented
the wards and rune markings on its flesh to reinforce its obedience. This
daemonhost would not be permitted to have any of the capricious guile of
the previous versions. It would not rebel. It would not be a maverick that
had to be watched at all times. It was bound and locked with triple wards,
totally subservient. I liked to think I could learn from my mistakes, at least
sometimes.
Of course, there was a price to pay for such security. This Cherubael
could manifest much less power, a direct consequence of its reinforced
bindings. But it had enough. More than enough.
It swept down the gorge, warp-flame trailing from its upright body, and
demolished one group of attackers in a blurry storm of aether. To their
credit, the Vessorines didn’t scream. But they broke and started to fall back.
The ogryn fired his heavy weapon at the incoming host. The impact
fluttered off Cherubael like petals. It punched its talons into the squealing
abhuman’s chest and lifted the big brute off the ground.
And then threw him. The ogryn went up. Just simply went up and kept
going.
Cherubael changed direction and skimmed across the gorge towards the
retreating mercs. Our guns had whittled their numbers down by then and we
were in pursuit, though Eleena had stayed with the sprawled, cursing Nayl.
I noticed something else about this new Cherubael. It didn’t laugh any
more. Ever. Its face was set in an implacable frown. It showed no signs of
taking any pleasure in its slaughter.
I was pleased about that. The laughter really did used to get on my
nerves.
It was going to take a while to get used to Cherubael’s new face, though.
Once installed within the flesh host, the daemon had made its usual
alterations – the sprouting nub horns, the talons, the smooth, glossy skin,
the blank eyes.
But it had not entirely erased the features of Godwyn Fischig.
IT KILLED THE last of the ambushers, all save one who reached the gorge
wall and accessed the dimension trap they had emerged from.
‘Hold it!’ I ordered. ‘Hold it open!’
Cherubael obeyed. It atomised the last merc as the trap blinked open and
then braced its arms wide, preventing the trap from closing. Even for
Cherubael, this was an effort.
‘Hurry. Up,’ it said, as if annoyed with me.
I reached the trap.
There wasn’t time to get us all through. Gustine hurled himself in,
headlong, and I followed, shouting to the others to stay back and stay
together.
The last thing I heard was a loud, liquid impact that must have been the
ogryn finally obeying the law of gravity.
The trap blinked shut.
I felt a sickening twist of translation. I landed on top of the sprawled
Gustine in a dim, boxy space that smelled musty.
‘Ow!’ he complained.
I got to my feet. That in itself was ridiculously hard. I was sweating
freely by the time I was vertical.
‘You okay?’ Gustine asked.
‘Yes,’ I snapped. I wasn’t really. My head was throbbing, and the pain in
my legs was beginning to overcome the power of the drugs that were self-
administering from a dispenser Crezia had fitted to my hip.
‘You had better not expect me to carry you,’ Cherubael whispered behind
me.
‘Don’t worry. Your dignity isn’t in danger.’
I drew Barbarisater, holding it in my right hand, and gripped my runestaff
in my left.
I stomped forward. Darkness. A wall. I turned. Another wall.
‘Gustine?’
He’d switched on a lamp pack, but it was showing him nothing but black
walls. There was no sign of a ceiling.
‘How far can you see?’ I asked Cherubael.
‘Forever,’ it said, floating alongside me.
‘Fine. In practical terms, how far can you see?’
‘Not far in here. I can see that the wall ends there. There is a gap beyond
it.’
‘Very well,’ I plodded ahead. My back really hurt now where the
implants went in and my nose was bleeding. Gustine clipped the lamp pack
to the bayonet lug of his las.
He tried to reach Nayl on the vox. Dead and silent.
I made an effort to reach Ravenor with my mind. Nothing.
Heavy footed, I moved through the darkness with my odd companions.
The runestaff was trembling, sniffing some focus of power.
‘You feel that?’ I asked the daemon.
It nodded.
I decided we would follow it.
‘HAVE YOU NOTICED we can breathe in here too?’ Gustine remarked a few
minutes later.
‘Gosh, I wouldn’t have picked up on that.’
He frowned at me, put-upon. ‘I mean, the air’s right, inside and out.’
‘It’s so the enemy can breathe,’ Cherubael said.
‘What’s that supposed to mean?’
‘They got here first. They got inside. Ghul made the atmosphere
appropriate for them as soon as Ghul sensed they were there.’
‘You’re talking like Ghul is alive.’
‘Ghul has never been alive,’ it said.
‘It’s never been dead, either,’ it added a moment later.
I was about to ask it to expand a little on that alarming notion, but
Cherubael suddenly surged forward in the blackness ahead of us. I saw the
flash of its light, a laser discharge.
It came back, blood steaming off its talons.
‘They’re hunting for us,’ it said.
I HAVE SEEN wonders in my life. Horrors too. I have witnessed vistas and
spectacles that have cowed my mind and dwarfed my imagination.
None of them compared to the mausoleum under Ghul.
I cannot say anything about its size except to use inadequate words like
vast, huge...
There was nothing to give any scale. We came out of the black tunnels
into a black abyss that was to all intents much the same except that the
blackness that had been walls was now immaterial. Tiny, scattered specks of
light, dozens of them, illuminated small parts of the face of some
impossible structure, as dark and cyclopean as the eternal wall ancient
philosophers used to believe surrounded creation. The edge of the universe.
The side of the casket an ancient god had wrought to keep reality in.
Which god, I wouldn’t like to say.
It was warm and still. Not even the air moved. The dots of light showed
small parts of a vast design etched onto the face of the mausoleum. Hints of
spirals, lines and swirling runes.
This was where the warped ones had laid their dead king to rest.
This was the tomb of Yssarile, over which Ghul had been raised in the
strange eons before man.
The sight even stunned Cherubael to silence. I hoped its lack of comment
was down to awe. I had a nasty feeling it had more to do with reverence.
Or dread.
Gustine lost it for a while. His mind refused to deal with what his eyes
were seeing. He began to weep inconsolably, and fell to his knees. It was a
dismal sight to see such a robust, fearless man reduced in such a way.
I let him be as long as I dared, but the sounds of his weeping carried in
the dark and seemed alarmingly loud. Some of the tiny lights on the face of
the mausoleum began to move, as if descending.
I took hold of the sobbing fighter and tried to use my will to calm him.
It didn’t work. No persuasion could anchor the edges of his sanity where
it had come adrift.
I had to be harsher. I numbed his mind with a deep psychic probe,
blocking his terror out and freezing his thoughts but for the most basic
instincts and biological functions.
WE APPROACHED THE mausoleum across a plain of lightless stone. The
further we got, the further away I realised the structure actually was. It was
evidently even bigger than I had first realised.
I had Gustine switch off his lamp pack. We simply followed the dots of
light up ahead. I suggested that Cherubael might like to warn us if the
darkness around us became anything other than a flat table of stone. A
chasm, for example.
The only advantage in the mindless scale of the place as I could see it
was that the enemy would have a hard job finding us. There was so much
space to search.
After what seemed like an hour, we were still a very long way from the
tomb. I checked my chronometer to determine precisely how long it had
been since we accessed the interior of Ghul, but it had stopped. Stopped
isn’t right exactly. It was still running and beating seconds, but the time was
not recording in any way.
I recalled the clock in Aemos’s suite, chiming to mark out times that had
no meaning.
AS WE CLOSED on our destination, I was able to make more sense of the
lights. Tiny dots, they had seemed, casting little fields of light.
They were massive lamps, high power, of the sort used to light landing
fields or military camps. Mounted on suspensor platforms, they floated at
various points in front of the face of the mausoleum, lighting up surface
details in patches of glare the size of amphitheatres. There were forty-three
of the platforms, each with its own lamp. I counted them.
There were men on the platforms, human figures. Glaw’s men, I was
sure, some of them mercenary guards, most of them adepts of arcane lore
enlisted to his cause.
As we watched, some of the platforms drifted slowly or adjusted the
sweep of their light.
They were reading the wall.
By whatever catalogue of means, Glaw had learned of this place, found it
and made his way inside to plunder its vile treasures. But its innermost
secrets clearly still eluded him.
That was why he had wanted the Malus Codicium so badly.
To turn the final lock, to get him through the final barrier.
One of the platforms began to climb vertically, its lamplight flickering
across the passing relief of the tomb face. It climbed and then halted far up
above at what seemed to be the top of the wall. Its beam picked out an open
square, an entrance, perhaps, though who would put an entrance at the top
of a wall without steps?
I scolded myself for asking. The warped ones.
‘Glaw is up there,’ Cherubael said.
It was right. I could smell the monster’s mind.
WE HURRIED THE last distance to the foot of the mausoleum wall. Several
cargo fliers and two bulk speeders were parked down here, alongside metal
crates of equipment and spares for the lamp platforms. Their base camp.
We waited. I considered our options.
Almost at the same time, two of the platforms descended the wall to
ground level, dimming their huge lamps. There were about six men on each
one.
One settled in and two men jumped down, hurrying towards one of the
cargo fliers. I could hear them, exchanging words with the crew on the
platform. A moment later the other came down softly beside it.
I could see the men. They were dressed in light fatigues or environment
robes. Some carried data-slates.
The men who had gone to the flier returned, carrying an equipment crate
between them. They loaded it onto the platform and it immediately began to
climb back up the wall, its lamp powering back to full beam to resume its
work.
‘Come on,’ I said quietly.
More men were loading more crates onto the other platform. There were
six in all – four in robes and two armoured meres operating the platform
controls.
Barbarisater took the three loaders out with two quick strokes. Gustine
dragged a man backwards over the platform rail and snapped his neck.
Cherubael embraced the two mercs from behind and they turned to ash and
sifted away.
We got on board.
‘Get ready with the lamp,’ I told Gustine. I studied the platform control
panel quickly, and then activated the lift. The attitude controls were a
simple brass lever.
We rose. The tomb face whispered by. As we lifted past the lowermost of
the working platforms, Gustine powered up the lamp and angled it towards
the wall.
I couldn’t remember quite how far up the platform had been before it had
descended for spares. How long before we passed our designated spot and
were noticed by the others?
I hoped they were all too engrossed in their work.
We were about two-thirds of the way up when we heard shots from
another platform and a lamp swung our way. Almost immediately, so did
several others, tracking our ascent. Las-fire pinged across at us. Gustine
dropped down by the rail and returned fire. I kept us rising.
‘Do you want me to...?’ Cherubael asked.
‘No, stay put.’
Gustine’s next salvo took out the lamp of a platform rising after us. A
huge shower of sparks erupted out and drizzled down the tomb face. I felt
multiple jolts as shots impacted against the underside of our rig.
Almost there.
We rose up next to the entrance. It was square, maybe forty metres
across. A platform was already floating outside it and, clumsy with the
controls, I slammed us against it. The men aboard began firing. There were
others inside the dim mouth of the entrance. Gustine blasted back. I saw one
topple back onto the deck of the other platform, and then another pitch
clean off and drop like a stone.
Las-fire and solid rounds raked our vehicle, tearing strips and nuggets out
of the deck plating and the rail. Shot through, the lamp died.
I hauled on the control stick and slammed us sideways into the other
platform, deliberately this time. We ground against them and drove them
into the tomb face. The edge of their hull shrieked out sparks as it tore
against the stone. I did it again. They were screaming and firing.
‘Let’s move!’ Gustine yelled.
He heaved a grenade into the mouth of the entrance to clear us a path.
There was a dull bang and a flash, and two figures came flailing out into
the air.
Gustine tossed a second onto the other platform and then leapt over the
rail into the tomb entrance, blasting into the wafting smoke haze with his
lasrifle.
I followed him, Cherubael drifting at my heels. It was damn hard to step
wide enough and span the gap between the platform and the entrance’s
stone lip.
Gustine’s second grenade ripped a hole through the deck of the other
platform. It sagged and then dropped, like a descending elevator, trailing
flames.
Far below us, it tore through two other platforms and spilled men and
debris into the air.
The jolt of the blast had come at the wrong moment for me. Our platform
shuddered and yawed out like a boat at a dock, and I was still halfway
across, forcing my stiff, heavy limbs to carry me.
I was going to fall. The brace around my body felt as heavy as an anchor,
pulling me down.
Cherubael grabbed me under the arms and hoisted me neatly into the
entrance.
I was grateful, but I couldn’t find it in me to thank it. Thank Cherubael?
The idea was toxic. Then again, just as unlikely was the notion of
Cherubael voluntarily saving my life...
Gustine was fighting his way forward down the entrance, which we saw
now was a long tunnel that matched the dimensions of the opening. Crates
of equipment were piled up in the mouth, and floating glow-globes had
been set at intervals along the wall. They looked like they went on for a
long way.
Four or five mercs and servants of our adversary were dead on the tunnel
floor and half a dozen more were backed down the throat of it, firing to
drive us out.
Cherubael swept forward and obliterated them. We came after him. I so
dearly wished I could run.
THE TUNNEL OPENED on the other side of the tomb face. We set eyes on
the interior. By now, I had become numb to the inhuman scale of things.
The tomb was a vault in which one might comfortably store a continent.
The inner walls and the high, stone-beamed roof were lavishly decorated
with swirls of script and emblems that I swore I would never allow to be
seen by other eyes. This was the crypt where Yssarile lay in death, and the
walls screamed his praise and worship.
I could make out little of the dark gulf below, but there was something
there. Something the size of a great Imperial hive city. I discerned a black,
geometric shape that was fashioned from neither stone nor metal nor even
bone, but, it seemed, all of those things at once. It was repellent. Dead, but
alive. Dormant, but filled with the slumbering power of a million stars.
The barque of the daemon-king. Yssarile’s chariot of unholy battle, his
instrument of apocalypse, with which he had scoured the warped fortresses
and habitations of his own reality in wars too dreadful to imagine.
Glaw’s prize.
From the globe-lit tunnel, we could make our way out onto a massive
plinth of dark onyx that extended from the edge of the inner wall. There
was a block raised there, a polished tooth of dark green mineral forty metres
tall, set deep into the plinth. It was wound with carved spirals.
Glow-globes floated around it and tools and instruments lay at its foot.
Pontius Glaw had been studying this discovery himself. But the noise of our
violent entry had alerted him. He was waiting for us.
He emerged from behind the standing block, calm, almost indifferent.
His tall, gleaming machine body was as I had remembered it from the auto-
séance. The cloak of blades clinked as he moved. The ever-smirking golden
mask smirked.
‘Gregor Eisenhorn,’ he said softly. ‘The galaxy’s most persistent bastard.
Only you could scrabble and slash and claw and crawl your way to me.
Which, of course, is why I admire you so.’
I stomped forward.
‘Careful!’ Gustine hissed, but I had long passed the point where being
careful was a high priority.
I faced Glaw. He was broader than me and a good deal taller. His blade-
cloak jangled as he stroked a perfectly articulated duralloy hand across the
surface of the green block. Then he raised the same hand and held it up for
inspection.
‘Magos Bure did a fine job, didn’t he? Such a craftsman. I can never
thank you enough for arranging his services. This is the hand I killed him
with.’
‘There’s more than his blood on your hands, Glaw. Do you answer to that
name now, or do you prefer to hide behind the title Khanjar?’
‘Either will do.’
‘Your daughter didn’t take either of your names.’
He was silent. If I could get him angry, I could perhaps force an error.
‘Maria,’ he said, ‘so headstrong. Another reason to kill you, apart from
the obvious.’
He was about to say something else, but I had waited long enough. I
blasted my will through the runestaff, and lunged forward, swinging my
blade.
The psychic blast knocked him back, and he half-turned, his cloak
whirling out and turning Barbarisater aside with its multiple edges. His turn
became a full spin and I lurched back to avoid the lethal hem of his blade-
cloak.
Gustine moved in, firing bolts of light that simply reflected off Glaw’s
gleaming form.
Cherubael came in from the other side. Its searing attack scorched Glaw’s
metal, and I heard him curse. He slashed at Cherubael with his open hand,
extending hook blades from slots in the fingertips.
The hooks ripped into Cherubael’s flesh but it made no cry. It grappled
with Pontius Glaw, psychic power boiling the space between them and
flaring out in spasming tendrils of light. The very air crisped and ionised.
Glaw’s dancing metal feet chipped flakes of onyx off the plinth beneath
him. I tried to get in, to land a blow in support of the daemonhost, but it was
like approaching a furnace.
Gustine simply looked on, open-mouthed. He was so far out of his league
it wasn’t funny.
Glaw tore out a savage blow that spun Cherubael away for a second and
followed it up with a lance of mental fury that actually made the
daemonhost tumble out of the air. Cherubael got up slowly, like a thrown
rider, and rose up off the ground again.
In that short break, I rejoined the struggle, driving at Glaw with alternate
blows of staff and sword, keeping the most powerful mind wall I could
erect between us.
Glaw smashed the wall into invisible pieces, struck me hard and tore the
staff out of my hand. His blades lacerated my arm and ripped my cloak.
I exerted all the force I had and rallied with Barbarisater, cutting in with
rotating ulsars and heavy sae hehts that chimed against his rippling cloak
armour. The runestaff had fallen out of reach.
I ducked to avoid a high sweep of his razor-hem, but I had forced myself
too hard. I felt cranial plugs pop and servos tear out of my back. Pain knifed
up my spine. I barely got clear of his next strike. My sword work became a
frantic series of tahn feh sar parries, as I tried to back away and fend off his
hooks and cloak-blades.
Cherubael charged back at Glaw, but something intercepted it in midair.
Out of the corner of my eye, I saw Cherubael locked in aerial combat with
an incandescent figure. They tumbled away, off the plinth, out over the gulf
of the tomb.
‘You don’t think you’re the only one to have a pet, do you?’ Glaw jeered.
‘And my daemonhost is not restricted in its power like yours. Poor
Cherubael. You’ve treated him so badly.’
‘It’s an “it”, not a “him”,’ I snarled and placed a high stroke that actually
notched his golden mask.
‘Bastard!’ he squealed and swept his cloak around under my guard. The
thick metal of my body-brace deflected the worst of it, but I felt blood
welling from cuts to my ribs.
I staggered back. The agony in my spine was the worst thing, and I was
certain my already limited motion was now badly impaired. My left leg felt
dead and heavy.
Ironhoof. Ironhoof.
He thrust at me with his talons and nearly shredded my face. I blocked
his hand at the last second, setting Barbarisater between his splayed fingers
and locking out his strike.
He threw me back. I was off-step, out-balanced by my slow, heavy
mechanical legs.
Laser shots danced across Glaw’s face and chest as Gustine tried vainly
to help out. Glaw pirouetted – a move that seemed impossibly nimble for
such a giant – and his cloak whirred out almost horizontally with the
centrifugal force.
Hundreds of fast moving, razor-sharp blades whistled through Gustine,
so fast, so completely, that he didn’t realise what had happened to him.
A mist of blood puffed in the air. Ghustine collapsed. Literally.
Glaw turned on me again. I’d lost sight of Cherubael. I was on my own.
And only now did I admit to myself that I was out-matched.
Glaw was almost impervious to damage. Fast, armoured, deadly. Even on
a good day, he would have been hard to defeat in single combat.
And this wasn’t a good day.
He was going to kill me.
He knew it too. As he pressed his assault, he started to laugh.
That cut me deeper than any of his blades. I thought of Fischig, Aemos
and Bequin. I thought of all the allies and friends who had perished because
of him. I thought of what his spite had done to me and what it had cost me
to get this far.
I thought of Cherubael. The laughter reminded me of Cherubael.
I came back at him so hard and so furiously that Barbarisater’s blade
became notched and chipped. I struck blows that snapped blade-scales off
his clinking cape. I struck at him until he wasn’t laughing any more.
His answer was a psychic blast that smashed me backwards ten paces.
Blood spurted from my nose and filled my mouth. I didn’t fall. I would not
give him that pleasure. But Barbarisater flew, screaming, from my
dislodged grip.
I was hunched over. My hands on my thighs, panting like a dog. My head
was swimming. I could hear him crunching over the onyx towards me.
‘You’d have won by now if you’d had the book,’ I said, coughing the
blood from my mouth.
‘What?’
‘The book. The damned book. The Malus Codicium. That’s what you
were really after when you sent your hired murderers against me. That’s
why you tore my operation apart and killed everyone you could reach. You
wanted the book.’
‘Of course I did,’ he snarled.
I looked up at him. ‘It would have unlocked the prize already. Done away
with this endless, fruitless study. You’d simply have opened the tomb and
taken the daemon’s chariot. Long before we could ever get here.’
‘Savour that little triumph, Gregor,’ he said. ‘Your little pyrrhic victory.
By keeping that book from me you have added extra months... years, to my
work. Yssarile’s weapon will be mine, but you’ve made its acquisition so
much harder.’
‘Good,’ I said.
He chuckled. ‘You’re a brave man, Gregor Eisenhorn. Come on, now –
I’ll make it quick.’
His blades clinked.
‘I suppose, then,’ I added, ‘I’d have been mad to bring it with me.’
He froze.
With a shaking, bloody hand, I reached into my coat and took out the
Malus Codicium. I think he gasped. I held it out, half open, so he could see,
and riffled the pages through with my fingers.
‘You foolish, foolish man,’ he said, smiling.
‘That’s what I thought,’ I said. With one brutal jerk, I ripped the pages
out of the cover.
‘No!’ he cried.
I wasn’t listening. I fixed my mind on the loose bundle of sheets in my
hands and subjected them to the most ferocious mental blast I could
manage. The pages caught fire.
I threw them up into the air.
Glaw screamed with despair and rage. A blizzard of burning pages
fluttered around us. He tried to grab at them. He moved like an idiot, like a
child, snatching what he could out of the air, trying to preserve anything,
anything at all.
The pages burned. Leaves of darkness, billowing across the plinth,
consumed by fire.
He snatched a handful, tried for more, stamping out those half-burned
sheets that landed on the ground.
He wasn’t paying any attention to me at all.
Barbarisater tore into him so hard it almost severed his head. Electricity
crackled from the rent metal. He rasped and staggered. The Carthean blade
sang in my hands as I ripped it across his chest and shattered part of his
cloak.
He fell backwards, right at the edge of the plinth, his finger hooks
shrieking as they fought to get a purchase on the smooth onyx. I swung
again, an upswing that ripped off his golden mask and sent it spinning out
over the gulf. The interior of his head was revealed. The circuits, the
crackling, fusing cables, the crystal that contained his consciousness and
being, set in its cradle of links and wires.
‘In the name of the Holy God-Emperor of Terra,’ I said quietly, ‘I call
thee diabolus and here deliver thy sentence.’
My own blood was dripping off Barbarisater’s hilt between my doubled
handed grip. I raised the blade.
And made the ewl caer.
The blade split his head and shattered the crystal into flecks of glass.
Pontius Glaw’s metal body convulsed, jerked back and fell off the edge
of the plinth, down into the gulf, into the blackness of the daemon-king’s
tomb, its cloak-blades chiming.
I WAS SITTING on the plinth, with my back against the tomb wall, blood
slowly pooling around me, when a flight flashed out in the darkness of the
vault.
It came closer.
At last, Cherubael floated down and hovered over me. Its face, limbs and
body were hideously marked with weals, burns and gashes.
I looked up at it. It was hard to move, hard to concentrate. There was
blood in my mouth, in my eyes.
‘Glaw’s daemonhost?’
‘Gone.’
‘He claimed it was more powerful than you.’
‘You don’t know how nasty I can be,’ it said.
I thought about that. The last of the diabolic book’s pages were mere tufts
of black ash, scattered across the plinth.
‘Are we finished here?’ it asked.
‘Yes,’ I said.
It frowned.
‘I’m going to have to carry you after all, aren’t I?’ it sighed.
Dossier addendum
Notes concerning the key individuals in this account
Inquisitor Gideon Ravenor supervised the annulment of 5213X, also
known in some records as Ghul. Despite long debates amongst the Sector
ordos, no attempt to recover an artefact and material from 5213X was ever
permitted. Under orders from Battlefleet Scarus, under the command of
Lord Admiral Olm Madorthene, annihilated the planet in 392.M41.
Ravenor continued to serve the Inquisition for several centuries, performing
many notable acts, including the destruction of the Heretic Thonius Slyte,
but his posthumous fame results more from the quality of his writings,
especially the peerless work The Spheres of Longing.
Inquisitor Golesh Heldane survived the destruction of the Essene at
Jeganda. His bodyguards were forced to sever his leg to free him and
carried him to his ship. He spent many years recovering from his horrific
injuries, which required still more severe augmetic reconstruction than he
had already undergone. He returned to active service, but his career was
blighted by his reputation. He was killed, following injury, on Menazoid
Epsilon in 765.M41.
Harlon Nayl continued in the service of the Inquisition for many years
and, along with Kara Swole and Eleena Koi, joined the staff of Inquisitor
Ravenor. Their individual fates are not recorded in the Imperial archive,
though it is believed that Nayl died circa 450.M41.
Crezia Berschilde returned to Gudrun, where she served as Chief
Medicae (anatomica) at the Universitariate of New Gevae until her
retirement due to failing health in 602.M41. Several of her treatise on
augmetic surgery have become standard authority texts.
Medea Betancore returned to Glavia and became the director of her
family shipwright business, a post she held for seventy years. She
disappeared en route to Sarum in 479.M41, although several later reports
suggest she survived that date.
Lord Inquisitor Phlebas Alessandro Rorken recovered from his ill-health
and became grand master of the Ordos Helican after the disappearance of
Leonid Osma. He held the post for three hundred and fifteen years.
Inquisitor Gregor Eisenhorn is believed to have continued in the service
of the ordos after the events on 5213X, though recorded details of his life
and work after that date are conjectural at best. His eventual fate is not
recorded in the Imperial archives.
There is no archived mention of the being known as ‘Cherubael’.
Table of Contents
Title page
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
XENOS
ONE
TWO
THREE
FOUR
FIVE
SIX
SEVEN
EIGHT
NINE
TEN
ELEVEN
TWELVE
THIRTEEN
FOURTEEN
FIFTEEN
SIXTEEN
SEVENTEEN
EIGHTEEN
NINETEEN
TWENTY
TWENTY-ONE
TWENTY-TWO
TWENTY-THREE
TWENTY-FOUR
TWENTY-FIVE
TWENTY-SIX
EPILOGUE
MISSING IN ACTION
MALLEUS
ONE
TWO
THREE
FOUR
FIVE
SIX
SEVEN
EIGHT
NINE
TEN
ELEVEN
TWELVE
THIRTEEN
FOURTEEN
FIFTEEN
SIXTEEN
SEVENTEEN
EIGHTEEN
NINETEEN
TWENTY
TWENTY-ONE
TWENTY-TWO
TWENTY-THREE
EPILOGUE
BACKCLOTH FOR A CROWN ADDITIONAL
HERETICUS
ONE
TWO
THREE
FOUR
FIVE
SIX
SEVEN
EIGHT
NINE
TEN
ELEVEN
TWELVE
THIRTEEN
FOURTEEN
FIFTEEN
SIXTEEN
SEVENTEEN
EIGHTEEN
NINETEEN
